First how Uther Pendragon sent for the duke of Cornwall and Igraine
  his wife, and of their departing suddenly again._

It befell in the days of Uther Pendragon, when he was king of all
England, and so reigned, that there was a mighty duke in Cornwall that
held war against him long time. And the duke was named the duke of
Tintagil. And so by means king Uther sent for this duke, charging him
to bring his wife with him, for she was called a fair lady, and a
passing wise, and her name was called Igraine. So when the duke and his
wife were come unto the king, by the means of great lords they were
accorded both: the king liked and loved this lady well, and he made
them great cheer out of measure, and desired to have had her love. But
she was a passing good woman, and would not assent unto the king. And
then she told the duke her husband, and said, I suppose that we were
sent for that I should be dishonoured, wherefore, husband, I counsel
you that we depart from hence suddenly, that we may ride all night to
our own castle. And in like wise as she said so they departed, that
neither the king nor none of his council were ware of their departing.
All so soon as king Uther knew of their departing so suddenly, he was
wonderly wroth. Then he called to him his privy council, and told them
of the sudden departing of the duke and his wife. Then they advised the
king to send for the duke and his wife by a great charge: and if he
will not come at your summons, then may ye do your best; then have ye
cause to make mighty war upon him. So that was done, and the messengers
had their answers, and that was this, shortly, that neither he nor his
wife would not come at him. Then was the king wonderly wroth. And then
the king sent him plain word again, and bade him be ready and stuff him
and garnish him, for within forty days he would fetch him out of the
biggest castle that he hath. When the duke had this warning, anon he
went and furnished and garnished two strong castles of his, of the
which the one hight Tintagil and the other castle hight Terrabil. So
his wife, dame Igraine, he put in the castle of Tintagil, and himself
he put in the castle of Terrabil, the which had many issues and
posterns out. Then in all haste came Uther with a great host, and laid
a siege about the castle of Terrabil. And there he pight many
pavilions, and there was great war made on both parties, and much
people slain. Then for pure anger and for great love of fair Igraine
the king Uther fell sick. So came to the king Uther Sir Ulfius, a noble
knight, and asked the king why he was sick. I shall tell thee, said the
king; I am sick for anger and for love of fair Igraine, that I may not
be whole. Well, my lord, said Sir Ulfius, I shall seek Merlin, and he
shall do you remedy that your heart shall be pleased. So Ulfius
departed, and by adventure he met Merlin in a beggar’s array, and there
Merlin asked Ulfius whom he sought? and he said he had little ado to
tell him. Well, said Merlin, I know whom thou seekest, for thou seekest
Merlin; therefore seek no further, for I am he, and if king Uther will
well reward me, and be sworn unto me to fulfil my desire, that shall be
his honour and profit more than mine, for I shall cause him to have all
his desire. All this will I undertake, said Ulfius, that there shall be
nothing reasonable but thou shalt have thy desire. Well, said Merlin,
he shall have his intent and desire. And therefore, said Merlin, ride
on your way, for I will not be long behind.


                               CHAP. II.

_How Uther Pendragon made war on the duke of Cornwall, and how by the
  means of Merlin he made the duchess his queen._

Then Ulfius was glad, and rode on more than a pace till that he came to
Uther Pendragon, and told him he had met with Merlin. Where is he? said
the king. Sir, said Ulfius, he will not dwell long. Therewithal Ulfius
was ware where Merlin stood at the porch of the pavilion’s door. And
then Merlin was bound to come to the king. When king Uther saw him he
said he was welcome. Sir, said Merlin, I know all your heart every
deal; so ye will be sworn unto me, as ye be a true king anointed, to
fulfil my desire, ye shall have your desire. Then the king was sworn
upon the four Evangelists. Sir, said Merlin, this is my desire: after
ye shall win Igraine ye shall have a child by her, and when that is
born that it shall be delivered to me for to nourish there as I will
have it; for it shall be your worship and the child’s avail, as mickle
as the child is worth. I will well, said the king, as thou wilt have
it. Now make you ready, said Merlin: this night shall you see Igraine
in the castle of Tintagil, and ye shall be like the duke her husband,
Ulfius shall be like Sir Brastias, a knight of the duke’s, and I will
be like a knight that hight Sir Jordanus, a knight of the duke’s. But
wait ye make not many questions with her nor with her men, but say you
are diseased, and so hie you to bed, and rise not on the morn till I
come to you, for the castle of Tintagil is but ten mile hence. So this
was done as they had devised. But the duke of Tintagil espied how the
king rode from the siege of Terrabil, and therefore that night he
issued out of the castle at a postern, for to have distressed the
king’s host. And so, through his own issue, the duke himself was slain
or ever the king came at the castle of Tintagil. So after the death of
the duke king Uther came to the castle, more than three hours after his
death; and there he found Igraine. And or day came Merlin came to the
king and bade him make him ready, and so he kissed the lady Igraine and
departed in all haste. But when the lady heard tell of the duke her
husband, and by all record he was dead or ever king Uther came to her,
then she marvelled who that might be that came to her in likeness of
her lord; so she mourned privily and held her peace. Then all the
barons by one assent prayed the king of accord between the lady Igraine
and him. The king gave them leave, for fain would he have been accorded
with her. So the king put all the trust in Ulfius to entreat between
them; so, by the entreat, at the last the king and she met together.
Now will we do well, said Ulfius: our king is a lusty knight and
wifeless, and my lady Igraine is a passing fair lady; it were great joy
unto us all and it might please the king to make her his queen. Unto
that they were all well accorded, and moved it to the king: and anon,
like a lusty knight, he assented thereto with good will, and so in all
haste they were married in a morning with great mirth and joy.

And king Lot of Lothian and of Orkney then wedded Margawse that was
Gawaine’s mother: and king Nentres of the land of Garlot wedded Elaine.
All this was done at the request of king Uther. And the third sister,
Morgan le Fay, was put to school in a nunnery: and there she learned so
much that she was a great clerk of nigromancy. And after she was wedded
to king Uriens of the land of Gore, that was Sir Ewaine’s le
Blanchemains father.


                               CHAP. III.

_Of the birth of king Arthur, and of his nouriture; and of the death of
  king Uther Pendragon; and how Arthur was chosen king; and of wonders
  and marvels of a sword that was taken out of a stone by the said
  Arthur._

Then the time came that the queen Igraine should bear a child. So it
fell within half a year, as king Uther was with his queen, he asked
her, by the faith she owed unto him, whose was the child that should be
born: then was she sore abashed to give answer. Dismay you not, said
the king, but tell me the truth, and I shall love you the better, by
the faith of my body. Sir, said she, I shall tell you the truth. The
same night that my lord was dead, the hour of his death, as his knights
record, there came into my castle of Tintagil a man like my lord in
speech and countenance, and two knights with him in likeness of his two
knights Brastias and Jordans, and so I welcomed him as I ought to
welcome my lord: and thus, as I shall answer unto God, this child was
begotten. That is truth, said the king, as you say, for it was I myself
that came in the likeness, and therefore dismay you not, for I am
father to the child. And there he told her all the cause how it was by
Merlin’s counsel. Then the Queen made great joy when she knew who was
the father of her child. Soon came Merlin unto the king and said, Sir,
ye must purvey you for the nourishing of your child. As thou wilt, said
the king, be it. Well, said Merlin, I know a lord of yours in this
land, that is a passing true man and a faithful, and he shall have the
nourishing of your child, and his name is Sir Ector, and he is a lord
of fair livelihood in many parts in England and Wales. And this lord,
Sir Ector, let him be sent for, for to come and speak with you, and
desire him yourself, as he loveth you, that he will put his own child
to nourishing to another woman, and that his wife nourish yours. And
when the child is born let it be delivered unto me at yonder privy
postern unchristened. So like as Merlin devised it was done. And when
Sir Ector was come he made affiance to the king for to nourish the
child like as the king desired; and there the king granted Sir Ector
great rewards. Then when the lady was delivered, the king commanded two
knights and two ladies to take the child bound in a cloth of gold, and
that ye deliver him to what poor man ye meet at the postern gate of the
castle. So the child was delivered unto Merlin, and so he bare it forth
unto Sir Ector, and made an holy man to christen him, and named him
Arthur: and so Sir Ector’s wife nourished him with her own breast.

Then within two years king Uther fell sick of a great malady. And in
the meanwhile his enemies usurped upon him, and did a great battle upon
his men, and slew many of his people. Sir, said Merlin, ye may not lie
so as ye do, for ye must to the field, though ye ride on an
horse-litter; for ye shall never have the better of your enemies but if
your person be there, and then shall ye have the victory. So it was
done as Merlin had devised, and they carried the king forth in a
horse-litter with a great host towards his enemies. And at St. Albans
there met with the king a great host of the North. And that day Sir
Ulfius and Sir Brastias did great deeds of arms, and king Uther’s men
overcame the Northern battle, and slew many people, and put the remnant
to flight. And then the king returned unto London, and made great joy
of his victory. And then he fell passing sore sick, so that three days
and three nights he was speechless; wherefore all the barons made great
sorrow, and asked Merlin what counsel were best. There is none other
remedy, said Merlin, but God will have his will. But look ye all barons
be before king Uther to-morn, and God and I shall make him to speak. So
on the morn all the barons with Merlin came tofore the king: then
Merlin said aloud unto king Uther, Sir, shall your son Arthur be king
after your days, of this realm, with all the appurtenance? Then Uther
Pendragon turned him and said in hearing of them all, I give him God’s
blessing and mine, and bid him pray for my soul, and righteously and
worshipfully that he claim the crown upon forfeiture of my blessing.
And therewith he yielded up the ghost. And then was he interred as
longed to a king. Wherefore the queen, fair Igraine, made great sorrow
and all the barons. Then stood the realm in great jeopardy long while,
for every lord that was mighty of men made him strong, and many wend to
have been king. Then Merlin went to the archbishop of Canterbury, and
counselled him for to send for all the lords of the realm, and all the
gentlemen of arms, that they should to London come by Christmas upon
pain of cursing: and for this cause—that Jesus, that was born on that
night, that he would of his great mercy shew some miracle, as he was
come to be king of mankind, for to shew some miracle who should be
rightwise king of this realm. So the archbishop by the advice of Merlin
sent for all the lords and gentlemen of arms, that they should come by
Christmas even unto London. And many of them made them clean of their
life, that their prayer might be the more acceptable unto God. So in
the greatest church of London (whether it were Paul’s or not, the
French book maketh no mention) all the estates were long or day in the
church for to pray. And when matins and the first mass was done, there
was seen in the churchyard against the high altar a great stone four
square, like unto a marble stone, and in the midst thereof was like an
anvil of steel a foot on high, and therein stack a fair sword naked by
the point, and letters there were written in gold about the sword that
said thus: Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil is
rightwise king born of all England. Then the people marvelled, and told
it to the archbishop. I command, said the archbishop, that ye keep you
within your church, and pray unto God still; that no man touch the
sword till the high mass be all done. So when all masses were done all
the lords went to behold the stone and the sword. And when they saw the
scripture, some assayed—such as would have been king. But none might
stir the sword nor move it. He is not here, said the archbishop, that
shall achieve the sword, but doubt not God will make him known. But
this is my counsel, said the archbishop, that we let purvey ten
knights, men of good fame, and they to keep this sword. So it was
ordained, and then there was made a cry, that every man should assay
that would, for to win the sword. And upon New Year’s Day the barons
let make a justs and a tournament, that all knights that would just or
tourney there might play: and all this was ordained for to keep the
lords together and the commons, for the archbishop trusted that God
would make him known that should win the sword. So upon New Year’s Day
when the service was done the barons rode to the field, some to just,
and some to tourney; and so it happed that Sir Ector, that had great
livelihood about London, rode unto the justs, and with him rode Sir Kay
his son and young Arthur that was his nourished brother, and Sir Kay
was made knight at Allhallowmas afore. So as they rode to the
justs-ward Sir Kay had lost his sword, for he had left it at his
father’s lodging, and so he prayed young Arthur to ride for his sword.
I will well, said Arthur, and rode fast after the sword; and when he
came home the lady and all were out to see the justing. Then was Arthur
wroth, and said to himself, I will ride to the churchyard and take the
sword with me that sticketh in the stone, for my brother Sir Kay shall
not be without a sword this day. So when he came to the churchyard Sir
Arthur alighted, and tied his horse to the stile, and so he went to the
tent, and found no knights there, for they were at the justing; and so
he handled the sword by the handles, and lightly and fiercely pulled it
out of the stone, and took his horse and rode his way till he came to
his brother Sir Kay, and delivered him the sword. And as soon as Sir
Kay saw the sword he wist well it was the sword of the stone, and so he
rode to his father Sir Ector, and said: Sir, lo here is the sword of
the stone; wherefore I must be king of this land. When Sir Ector beheld
the sword he returned again and came to the church, and there they
alighted all three and went into the church, and anon he made Sir Kay
to swear upon a book how he came to that sword. Sir, said Sir Kay, by
my brother Arthur, for he brought it to me. How gat ye this sword? said
Sir Ector to Arthur. Sir, I will tell you: when I came home for my
brother’s sword, I found nobody at home to deliver me his sword, and so
I thought my brother Sir Kay should not be swordless, and so I came
hither eagerly and pulled it out of the stone without any pain. Found
ye any knights about this sword? said Sir Ector. Nay, said Arthur. Now,
said Sir Ector to Arthur, I understand ye must be king of this land.
Wherefore I, said Arthur, and for what cause? Sir, said Ector, for God
will have it so: for there should never man have drawn out this sword
but he that shall be rightwise king of this land. Now let me see
whether ye can put the sword there as it was, and pull it out again.
That is no mastery, said Arthur: and so he put it into the stone.
Therewith Sir Ector assayed to pull out the sword and failed.


                               CHAP. IV.

_How king Arthur pulled out the sword divers times._

Now assay, said Sir Ector to Sir Kay. And anon he pulled at the sword
with all his might, but it would not be. Now shall ye assay, said Sir
Ector to Arthur. I will well, said Arthur, and pulled it out easily.
And therewithal Sir Ector kneeled down to the earth, and Sir Kay. Alas,
said Arthur, mine own dear father and brother, why kneel ye to me. Nay,
nay, my lord Arthur, it is not so: I was never your father nor of your
blood, but I wote well ye are of an higher blood than I wend ye were.
And then Sir Ector told him all, how he was betaken him for to nourish
him, and by whose commandment, and by Merlin’s deliverance. Then Arthur
made great dole when he understood that Sir Ector was not his father.
Sir, said Ector unto Arthur, will ye be my good and gracious lord when
ye are king? Else were I to blame, said Arthur, for ye are the man in
the world that I am most beholding to, and my good lady and mother your
wife, that as well as her own hath fostered me and kept. And if ever it
be God’s will that I be king, as ye say, ye shall desire of me what I
may do, and I shall not fail you: God forbid I should fail you. Sir,
said Sir Ector, I will ask no more of you but that you will make my
son, your foster-brother Sir Kay, seneschal of all your lands. That
shall be done, said Arthur, and more by the faith of my body, that
never man shall have that office but he while he and I live.
Therewithal they went unto the archbishop, and told him how the sword
was achieved, and by whom. And on Twelfth Day all the barons came
thither, and to assay to take the sword who that would assay. But there
afore them all there might none take it out but Arthur, wherefore there
were many lords wroth, and said it was great shame unto them all and
the realm, to be over governed with a boy of no high blood born. And so
they fell out at that time that it was put off till Candlemas, and then
all the barons should meet there again. But always the ten knights were
ordained to watch the sword day and night, and so they set a pavilion
over the stone and the sword, and five always watched. So at Candlemas
many more great lords came thither for to have won the sword, but there
might none prevail. And right as Arthur did at Christmas he did at
Candlemas, and pulled out the sword easily, whereof the barons were
sore aggrieved, and put it off in delay till the high feast of Easter.
And as Arthur sped afore, so did he at Easter: yet there were some of
the great lords had indignation that Arthur should be their king, and
put it off in a delay till the feast of Pentecost. Then the archbishop
of Canterbury by Merlin’s providence let purvey then of the best
knights that they might get, and such knights as king Uther Pendragon
loved best and most trusted in his days, and such knights were put
about Arthur, as Sir Baudwin of Britain, Sir Kay, Sir Ulfius, Sir
Brastias. All these, with many other, were always about Arthur, day and
night, till the feast of Pentecost.


                                CHAP. V.

_How King Arthur was crowned, and how he made officers._

And at the feast of Pentecost all manner of men assayed to pull at the
sword that would assay, but none might prevail but Arthur; and he
pulled it out afore all the lords and commons that were there,
wherefore all the commons cried at once, We will have Arthur unto our
king; we will put him no more in delay, for we all see that it is God’s
will that he shall be our king, and who that holdeth against it we will
slay him. And therewithal they kneeled down all at once, both rich and
poor, and cried Arthur mercy, because they had delayed him so long. And
Arthur forgave them, and took the sword between both his hands, and
offered it upon the altar where the archbishop was, and so was he made
knight of the best man that was there. And so anon was the coronation
made, and there was he sworn unto his lords and the commons for to be a
true king, to stand with true justice from thenceforth the days of this
life. Also then he made all lords that held of the crown to come in,
and to do service as they ought to do. And many complaints were made
unto Sir Arthur of great wrongs that were done since the death of king
Uther, of many lands that were bereaved lords, knights, ladies, and
gentlemen. Wherefore king Arthur made the lands to be given again unto
them that owned them. When this was done that the king had stablished
all the countries about London, then he let make Sir Kay seneschal of
England; and Sir Baudwin of Britain was made constable; and Sir Ulfius
was made chamberlain; and Sir Brastias was made warden to wait upon the
north from Trent forwards, for it was that time for the most part the
king’s enemies. But within few years after, Arthur won all the north,
Scotland, and all that were under their obeisance. Also Wales, a part
of it held against Arthur, but he overcame them all as he did the
remnant through the noble prowess of himself and his knights of the
Round Table.


                               CHAP. VI.

_How king Arthur held in Wales at a Pentecost a great feast, and what
  kings and lords came to his feast._

Then the king removed into Wales, and let cry a great feast, that it
should be holden at Pentecost, after the incoronation of him at the
city of Carlion. Unto the feast came king Lot of Lothian and of Orkney
with five hundred knights with him. Also there came to the feast king
Uriens of Gore with four hundred knights with him. Also there came to
that feast king Nentres of Garloth with seven hundred knights with him.
Also there came to the feast the king of Scotland with six hundred
knights with him, and he was but a young man. Also there came to the
feast a king that was called the king with the hundred knights, but he
and his men was passing well beseen at all points. Also there came the
king of Carados with five hundred knights. And king Arthur was glad of
their coming, for he wend that all the kings and knights had come for
great love, and for to have done him worship at his feast, wherefore
the king made great joy, and sent the kings and knights great presents.
But the kings would none receive, but rebuked the messengers
shamefully, and said they had no joy to receive no gifts of a beardless
boy that was come of low blood, and sent him word they would have none
of his gifts, but that they were come to give him gifts with hard
swords betwixt the neck and the shoulders: and therefore they came
thither, so they told to the messengers plainly, for it was great shame
to all them to see such a boy to have a rule of so noble a realm as
this land was. With this answer the messengers departed, and told to
king Arthur this answer. Wherefore, by the advice of his barons, he
took him to a strong tower with five hundred good men with him: and all
the kings aforesaid in a manner laid a siege tofore him, but king
Arthur was well victualled. And within fifteen days there came Merlin
among them into the city of Carlion. Then all the kings were passing
glad of Merlin, and asked him, For what cause is that boy Arthur made
your king? Sirs, said Merlin, I shall tell you the cause. For he is
king Uther Pendragon’s son, born in wedlock of Igraine, the duke’s wife
of Tintagil. After the death of the duke thirteen days king Uther
Pendragon wedded fair Igraine. And who saith nay, he shall be king, and
overcome all his enemies; and, or he die, he shall be long king of all
England, and have under his obeisance Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, and
more realms than I will now rehearse. Some of the kings had marvel of
Merlin’s words, and deemed well that it should be as he said: and some
of them laughed him to scorn, as king Lot: and more other called him a
witch. But then were they accorded with Merlin that king Arthur should
come out and speak with the kings, and to come safe and go safe, such
assurance was there made. So Merlin went unto king Arthur and told him
how he had done, and bade him fear not, but come out boldly and speak
with them, and spare them not, but answer them as their king and
chieftain, for ye shall overcome them all whether they will or nill.


                               CHAP. VII.

_Of the first war that king Arthur had, and how he won the field._

Then king Arthur came out of his tower, and had under his gown a
jesseraunt of double mail, and there went with him the archbishop of
Canterbury, and Sir Baudwin of Britain, and Sir Kay, and Sir Brastias:
these were the men of most worship that were with him. And when they
were met there was no meekness, but stout words on both sides: but
always king Arthur answered them, and said that he would make them to
bow and he lived. Wherefore they departed with wrath, and king Arthur
bade keep them well, and they bade the king keep him well. So the king
returned him to the tower again, and armed him and all his knights.
What will ye do? said Merlin to the kings: ye were better for to stint,
for ye shall not here prevail though ye were ten so many. Be we well
advised to be afraid of a dream-reader? said king Lot. With that Merlin
vanished away, and came to king Arthur, and bade him set on them
fiercely; and in the meanwhile there were three hundred good men of the
best that were with the kings that went straight unto king Arthur, and
that comforted him greatly. Sir, said Merlin to Arthur, fight not with
the sword that ye had by miracle, till that ye see ye go unto the
worse, then draw it out and do your best. So forthwithal king Arthur
set upon them in their lodging. And Sir Baudwin, Sir Kay, and Sir
Brastias slew on the right hand and on the left hand that it was
marvellous: and always king Arthur on horseback laid on with a sword,
and did marvellous deeds of arms, that many of the kings had great joy
of his deeds and hardiness. Then king Lot brake out on the back side,
and the king with the hundred knights, and king Carados, and set on
Arthur fiercely behind him. With that Sir Arthur turned with his
knights and smote behind and before, and ever Sir Arthur was in the
foremost press till his horse was slain underneath him. And therewith
king Lot smote down king Arthur. With that his four knights received
him, and set him on horseback. Then he drew his sword Excalibur, but it
was so bright in his enemies’ eyes, that it gave light like thirty
torches. And therewith he put them on back, and slew much people. And
then the commons of Carlion arose with clubs and staves, and slew many
knights; but all the kings held them together with their knights that
were left alive, and so fled and departed. And Merlin came unto Arthur,
and counselled him to follow them no farther.


                              CHAP. VIII.

_How Merlin counselled king Arthur to send for king Ban and king Bors,
  and of their counsel taken for the war._

So after the feast and tourney king Arthur drew him unto London, and so
by the counsel of Merlin the king let call his barons to council. For
Merlin had told the king that the six kings that made war upon him
would in all haste be awroke on him and on his lands. Wherefore the
king asked counsel at them all. They could no counsel give, but said
they were big enough. Ye say well, said Arthur; I thank you for your
good courage; but will ye all that love me speak with Merlin: ye know
well that he hath done much for me, and he knoweth many things, and
when he is afore you I would that ye prayed him heartily of his best
advice. All the barons said they would pray him and desire him. So
Merlin was sent for, and fair desired of all the barons to give them
best counsel. I shall say you, said Merlin, I warn you all, your
enemies are passing strong for you, and they are good men of arms as be
on live, and by this time they have gotten to them four kings more, and
a mighty duke; and unless that our king have more chivalry with him
than he may make within the bounds of his own realm, and he fight with
them in battle he shall be overcome and slain. What were best to do in
this cause? said all the barons. I shall tell you, said Merlin, mine
advice: There are two brethren beyond the sea, and they be kings both,
and marvellous good men of their hands; and that one hight king Ban of
Benwick, and that other hight king Bors of Gaul, that is France. And on
these two kings warreth a mighty man of men, the king Claudas, and
striveth with them for a castle; and great war is betwixt them: but
this Claudas is so mighty of goods, whereof he getteth good knights,
that he putteth these two kings the most part to the worse. Wherefore
this is my counsel, that our king and sovereign lord send unto the
kings Ban and Bors by two trusty knights with letters well devised,
that if they will come and see king Arthur and his court, and so help
him in his wars, that he will be sworn unto them to help them in their
wars against king Claudas. Now what say ye unto this counsel? said
Merlin. This is well counselled, said the king and all the barons.
Right so in all haste there were ordained to go two knights on the
message unto the two kings. So were there made letters in the pleasant
wise according unto king Arthur’s desire. Ulfius and Brastias were made
the messengers, and rode forth well horsed and well armed, and as the
guise was that time, and so passed the sea and rode toward the city of
Benwick. And there besides were eight knights who espied them, and at a
straight passage they met with Ulfius and Brastias, and would have
taken them prisoners. So they prayed them that they might pass, for
they were messengers unto king Ban and Bors sent from king Arthur.
Therefore, said the eight knights, ye shall die, or be prisoners, for
we be knights of king Claudas. And therewith two of them dressed their
spears, and Ulfius and Brastias dressed their spears, and ran together
with great might, and Claudas’s knights brake their spears, and theirs
to-held, and bare the two knights out of their saddles to the earth,
and so left them lying, and rode their ways. And the other six knights
rode afore to a passage to meet with them again, and so Ulfius and
Brastias smote other two down, and so passed on their ways. And at the
fourth passage there met two for two, and both were laid to the earth:
so there was none of the eight knights but he was sore hurt or bruised.
And when they came to Benwick it fortuned there were both kings Ban and
Bors. And when it was told the kings that there were come messengers,
there were sent to them two knights of worship, the one hight Lionses,
lord of the country of Payarne, and Sir Phariance a worshipful knight.
Anon they asked from whence they came, and they said from king Arthur
king of England: so they took them in their arms, and made great joy
each of other. But anon as the two kings wist they were messengers of
Arthur’s, there was made no tarrying, but forthwith they spake with the
knights and welcomed them in the faithfullest wise, and said they were
most welcome unto them before all the kings living. And therewith they
kissed the letters and delivered them; and when Ban and Bors understood
the letters, then were they more welcome than they were before. And
after the haste of the letters they gave them this answer, that they
would fulfil the desire of king Arthur’s writing, and let Ulfius and
Brastias tarry there as long as they would, they should have such cheer
as might be made them in those marches. Then Ulfius and Brastias told
the king of the adventure at their passages of the eight knights. Ha,
ha, said Ban and Bors, they were my good friends. I would I had wist of
them, they should not have escaped so. So Ulfius and Brastias had good
cheer and great gifts as much as they might bear away, and had their
answer by mouth and by writing, that those two kings would come unto
Arthur in all the haste that they might.

So the two knights rode on afore, and passed the sea, and came to their
lord and told him how they had sped, whereof king Arthur was passing
glad. At what time suppose ye the two kings will be here? Sir, said
they, afore Allhallowmas. Then the king let purvey for a great feast,
and let cry a great justs. And by Allhallowmas the two kings were come
over the sea with three hundred knights well arrayed both for the peace
and for the war. And king Arthur met with them ten mile out of London,
and there was great joy as could be thought or made. And on
Allhallowmas at the great feast sat in the hall the three kings, and
Sir Kay the seneschal served in the hall, and Sir Lucas the butler,
that was duke Corneus’s son, and Sir Griflet that was the son of
Cardol, these three knights had the rule of all the service that served
the kings. And anon as they had washed and risen, all knights that
would just made them ready. By then they were ready on horseback there
were seven hundred knights. And Arthur, Ban, and Bors, with the
archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Ector, Kay’s father, they were in a
place covered with cloth of gold, like an hall, with ladies and
gentlewomen, for to behold who did best, and thereon to give judgment.


                               CHAP. IX.

_Of a great tourney made by king Arthur and the two kings Ban and Bors,
  and how they went over the Sea._

And king Arthur and the two kings let part the seven hundred knights in
two parties. And there were three hundred knights of the realm of
Benwick and of Gaul turned on the other side. Then they dressed their
shields, and began to couch their spears many good knights. So Griflet
was the first that met with a knight, one Ladinas, and they met so
eagerly that all men had wonder; and they so fought that their shields
fell to pieces, and horse and man fell to the earth, and both the
French knight and the English knight lay so long, that all men wend
they had been dead. When Lucas the butler saw Griflet so lie, he horsed
him again anon, and they two did marvellous deeds of arms with many
bachelors. Also Sir Kay came out of an embushment with five knights
with him, and they six smote other six down. But Sir Kay did that day
marvellous deeds of arms, that there was none did so well as he that
day. Then there came Ladinas and Grastian, two knights of France, and
did passing well, that all men praised them. Then came there Sir
Placidas, a good knight, and met with Sir Kay and smote him down, horse
and man, wherefore Sir Griflet was wroth, and met with Sir Placidas so
hard that horse and man fell to the earth. But when the five knights
wist that Sir Kay had a fall they were wroth out of wit, and therewith
each of them five bare down a knight. When king Arthur and the two
kings saw them begin to wax wroth on both parts, they leapt on small
hackneys, and let cry that all men should depart unto their lodging.
And so they went home and unarmed them, and so to even-song and supper.
And after the three kings went into a garden, and gave the prize unto
Sir Kay, and to Lucas the butler, and unto Sir Griflet. And then they
went unto council, and with them Gwenbaus, the brother unto Sir Ban and
Bors, a wise clerk, and thither went Ulfius, and Brastias, and Merlin.
And after they had been in council they went unto bed. And on the morn
they heard mass, and to dinner, and so to their council, and made many
arguments what were best to do. At the last they were concluded, that
Merlin should go with a token of king Ban, (and that was a ring,) unto
his men and king Bors’s: and Gracian and Placidas should go again and
keep their castles and their countries, as king Ban of Benwick and king
Bors of Gaul had ordained them; and so they passed the sea and came to
Benwick. And when the people saw king Ban’s ring, and Gracian and
Placidas, they were glad, and asked how the kings fared, and made great
joy of their welfare and according. And according unto the sovereign
lords’ desire, the men of war made them ready in all haste possible, so
that they were fifteen thousand on horse and foot, and they had great
plenty of victual with them by Merlin’s provision. But Gracian and
Placidas were left to furnish and garnish the castles for dread of king
Claudas. Right so Merlin passed the sea, well victualled both by water
and by land. And when he came to the sea he sent home the footmen
again, and took no more with him but ten thousand men on horseback, the
most part men of arms, and so shipped and passed the sea into England,
and landed at Dover: and through the wit of Merlin he led the host
northward, the priviest way that could be thought, unto the forest of
Bedegraine, and there in a valley he lodged them secretly.

Then rode Merlin unto king Arthur and the two kings and told them how
he had sped, whereof they had great marvel, that man on earth might
speed so soon, and go and come. So Merlin told them ten thousand were
in the forest of Bedegraine, well armed at all points. Then was there
no more to say, but to horseback went all the host as Arthur had afore
purveyed. So with twenty thousand he passed by night and day. But there
was made such an ordinance afore by Merlin, that there should no man of
war ride nor go in no country on this side Trent water, but if he had a
token from king Arthur, where through the king’s enemies durst not
ride, as they did tofore, to espy.


                                CHAP. X.

_How eleven kings gathered a great host against king Arthur._

And so within a little space the three kings came unto the castle of
Bedegraine, and found there a passing fair fellowship and well beseen,
whereof they had great joy, and victual they wanted none.

This was the cause of the northern host: that they were reared for the
despite and rebuke that the six kings had at Carlion. And those six
kings by their means gat unto them five other kings, and thus they
began to gather their people, and how they sware that for weal nor woe
they should not leave each other till they had destroyed Arthur. And
then they made an oath. The first that began the oath was the duke of
Cambenet, that he would bring with him five thousand men of arms, the
which were ready on horseback. Then sware king Brandegoris of
Stranggore that he would bring five thousand men of arms on horseback.
Then sware king Clariance of Northumberland that he would bring three
thousand men of arms. Then sware the king of the hundred knights, that
was a passing good man and a young, that he would bring four thousand
men on horseback. Then there swore king Lot, a passing good knight and
Sir Gawaine’s father, that he would bring five thousand men of arms on
horseback. Also there swore king Urience, that was Sir Uwaine’s father,
of the land of Gore, and he would bring six thousand men of arms on
horseback. Also there swore king Idres of Cornwall, that he would bring
five thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore king Cradelmas
to bring five thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore king
Agwisance of Ireland, to bring five thousand men of arms on horseback.
Also there swore king Nentres to bring five thousand men of arms on
horseback. Also there swore king Carados to bring five thousand men of
arms on horseback. So their whole host was of clean men of arms on
horseback fifty thousand; and afoot ten thousand of good mens’ bodies.
Then were they soon ready and mounted upon horse, and sent forth their
fore-riders: for these eleven kings in their way laid siege unto the
castle of Bedegraine; and so they departed and drew toward Arthur, and
left few to abide at the siege, for the castle of Bedegraine was holden
of king Arthur, and the men that were therein were Arthur’s.


                               CHAP. XI.

_Of a dream of the king with the hundred knights._

So by Merlin’s advice there were sent fore-riders to skim the country,
and they met with the fore-riders of the north, and made them to tell
which way the host came, and then they told it to Arthur, and by king
Ban and Bors’s counsel they let burn and destroy all the country afore
them where they should ride.

The king with the hundred knights dreamed a wonder dream two nights
afore the battle, that there blew a great wind, and blew down their
castles and their towns, and after that came a water and bare it all
away. All that heard of the dream said it was a token of great battle.
Then, by counsel of Merlin, when they wist which way the eleven kings
would ride and lodge that night, at midnight they set upon them, as
they were in their pavilions. But the scout-watch by their host cried,
Lords! at arms! for here be your enemies at your hand!


                               CHAP. XII.

_How the eleven kings with their host fought against Arthur and his
  host, and many great feats of the war._

Then king Arthur and king Ban and king Bors, with their good and trusty
knights, set on them so fiercely that they made them overthrow their
pavilions on their heads; but the eleven kings by manly prowess of arms
took a fair field. But there was slain that morrow tide ten thousand
good men’s bodies. And so they had afore them a strong passage, yet
were they fifty thousand of hardy men. Then it drew toward day. Now
shall ye do by mine advice, said Merlin unto the three kings: I would
that king Ban and king Bors with their fellowship of ten thousand men
were put in a wood here beside in an embushment, and keep them privy,
and that they be laid or the light of the day come, and that they stir
nor till ye and your knights have fought with them long: and when it is
daylight dress your battle even afore them and the passage, that they
may see all your host, for then they will be the more hardy when they
see you but about twenty thousand, and be the gladder to suffer you and
your host to come over the passage. All the three kings and the whole
barons said that Merlin said passingly well, and it was done anon as
Merlin had devised. So on the morn, when either host saw other, the
host of the north was well comforted. Then to Ulfius and Brastias were
delivered three thousand men of arms, and they set on them fiercely in
the passage, and slew on the right hand and on the left hand, that it
was wonder to tell. When that the eleven knights saw that there was so
few a fellowship did such deeds of arms, they were ashamed, and set on
them again fiercely, and there was Sir Ulfius’s horse slain under him,
but he did marvellously well on foot. But the duke Eustace of Cambenet,
and king Clariance of Northumberland, were alway grievous on Sir
Ulfius. When Brastias saw his fellow fared so withal, he smote the duke
with a spear, that horse and man fell down. That saw king Clariance,
and returned to Brastias, and either smote other so that horse and man
went to the earth, and so they lay long astonied, and their horses’
knees brast to the hard bone. Then came Sir Kay the seneschal with six
fellows with him, and did passing well. With that came the eleven
kings, and there was Griflet put to the earth, horse and man, and Lucas
the butler, horse and man, by king Brandegoris and king Idres and king
Agwisance. Then waxed the meddle passing hard on both parties. When Sir
Kay saw Griflet on foot he rode on king Nentres and smote him down, and
led his horse to Sir Griflet and horsed him again. Also Sir Kay with
the same spear smote down king Lot, and hurt him passing sore. That saw
the king with the hundred knights, and ran unto Sir Kay and smote him
down and took his horse, and gave him to king Lot, whereof he said
gramercy. When Sir Griflet saw Sir Kay and Lucas the butler on foot, he
took a sharp spear great and square and rode to Pinel, a good man of
arms, and smote horse and man down, and then he took his horse and gave
him unto Sir Kay. When king Lot saw king Nentres on foot he ran unto
Melot de la Roche and smote him down horse and man, and gave king
Nentres the horse and horsed him again. Also the king of the hundred
knights saw king Idres on foot; then he ran unto Gwimiart de Bloi, and
smote him down horse and man, and gave king Idres the horse and horsed
him again; and king Lot smote down Clariance de la Forest Savage, and
gave the horse unto duke Eustace. And so when they had horsed the kings
again they drew them all eleven kings together, and said they would be
revenged of the damage they had taken that day. The meanwhile came in
Sir Ector with an eager countenance, and found Ulfius and Brastias on
foot in great peril of death, that were foul bruised under the horse
feet. Then king Arthur as a lion ran unto king Cradelment of North
Wales, and smote him through the left side, that the horse and the king
fell down; and then he took the horse by the rein and led him unto
Ulfius, and said, Have this horse, mine old friend, for great need hast
thou of horse. Gramercy, said Ulfius. Then Sir Arthur did so
marvellously in arms that all men had wonder. When the king with the
hundred knights saw king Cradelment on foot he ran unto Sir Ector, that
was well horsed, Sir Kay’s father, and smote horse and man down, and
gave the horse unto the king and horsed him again. And when king Arthur
saw the king ride on Sir Ector’s horse he was wroth, and with his sword
he smote the king on the helm, that a quarter of the helm and shield
fell down, and the sword carved down unto the horse’s neck, and so the
king and the horse fell down to the ground. Then Sir Kay came to Sir
Morganore, seneschal with the king of the hundred knights, and smote
him down horse and man, and led the horse unto his father Sir Ector:
then Sir Ector ran unto a knight, hight Lardans, and smote horse and
man down, and led the horse unto Sir Brastias that great need had of an
horse, and was greatly bruised. When Brastias beheld Lucas the butler,
that lay like a dead man under the horse feet, and ever Sir Griflet did
marvellously for to rescue him, and there were always fourteen knights
on Sir Lucas, then Brastias smote one of them on the helm that it went
to the teeth, and he rode to another and smote him that the arm flew
into the field. Then he went to the third, and smote him on the
shoulder that shoulder and arm flew in the field. And when Griflet saw
rescues he smote a knight on the temples, that head and helm went to
the earth, and Griflet took the horse of that knight and led him unto
Sir Lucas, and bad him mount upon the horse and revenge his hurts. For
Brastias had slain a knight tofore, and horsed Griflet.


                              CHAP. XIII.

_Yet of the same battle._

Then Lucas saw king Agwisance, that late had slain Moris de la Roche,
and Lucas ran to him with a short spear that was great, that he gave
him such a fall that the horse fell down to the earth. Also Lucas found
there on foot Bloias de la Flandres and Sir Gwinas, two hardy knights,
and in that woodness that Lucas was in he slew two bachelors, and
horsed them again. Then waxed the battle passing hard on both parties,
but Arthur was glad that his knights were horsed again, and then they
fought together that the noise and sound rang by the water and the
wood. Wherefore king Ban and king Bors made them ready and dressed
their shields and harness, and they were so courageous that many
knights shook and trembled for eagerness. All this while Lucas, and
Gwinas, and Briant, and Bellias of Flanders, held strong meddle against
six kings, that was king Lot, king Nentres, king Brandegoris, king
Idres, king Uriens, and king Agwisance. So with the help of Sir Kay and
of Sir Griflet they held these six kings hard, that unneth they had any
power to defend them. But when Sir Arthur saw the battle would not be
ended by no manner he fared wood as a lion, and steered his horse here
and there, on the right hand and on the left hand, that he stinted not
till he had slain twenty knights. Also he wounded king Lot sore on the
shoulder, and made him to leave that ground, for Sir Kay and Griflet
did with king Arthur there great deeds of arms. Then Ulfius, Brastias,
and Sir Ector, encountered against the duke Eustace, and king
Cradelment, and king Cradelmas, and king Clariance of Northumberland,
and king Carados, and against the king with the hundred knights. So
these knights encountered with these kings that they made them to avoid
the ground. Then king Lot made great dole for his damages and his
fellows, and said unto the eleven kings. But if ye will do as I devise
we shall be slain and destroyed: let me have the king with the hundred
knights, and king Agwisance, and king Idres, and the duke of Cambenet,
and we five kings will have fifteen thousand men of arms with us, and
we will go apart while ye six kings hold the meddle with twelve
thousand, and when we see that ye have foughten with them long then
will we come on fiercely, and else shall we never match them, said king
Lot, but by this mean. So they departed as they here devised, and six
kings made their party strong against Arthur, and made great war long.
In the meanwhile brake the embushment of king Ban and Bors, and Lionses
and Phariance had the advant guard, and they two knights met with king
Idres and his fellowship, and there began a great meddle of breaking of
spears and smiting of swords with slaying of men and horses, and king
Idres was near at discomfiture.

That saw Agwisance the king, and put Lionses and Phariance in point of
death: for the duke of Cambenet came on withal with a great fellowship,
so these two knights were in great danger of their lives that they were
fain to return, but always they rescued themselves and their fellowship
marvellously. When king Bors saw those knights put aback it grieved him
sore; then he came on so fast that his fellowship seemed as black as
Inde. When king Lot had espied king Bors he knew him well; then he
said, O defend us from death and horrible maims, for I see well we be
in great peril of death; for I see yonder a king, one of the most
worshipfulest men, and one of the best knights of the world, is
inclined unto his fellowship. What is he? said the king with the
hundred knights. It is, said king Lot, king Bors of Gaul; I marvel how
they came into this country without witting of us all. It was by
Merlin’s advice, said the knight. As for him, said king Carados, I will
encounter with king Bors, if ye will rescue me when need is. Go on,
said they all, we will do all that we may. Then king Carados and his
host rode on a soft pace till that they came as nigh king Bors as a bow
draught: then either battle let their horses run as fast as they might.
And Bleoberis that was god-son unto king Bors he bare his chief
standard, that was a passing good knight. Now shall we see, said king
Bors, how these northern Britons can bear their arms. And king Bors
encountered with a knight, and smote him throughout with a spear that
he fell dead unto the earth, and after drew his sword and did
marvellous deeds of arms, that all parties had great wonder thereof;
and his knights failed not but did their part, and king Carados was
smitten to the earth. With that came the king with the hundred knights
and rescued king Carados mightily by force of arms, for he was a
passing good knight of a king, and but a young man.


                               CHAP. XIV.

_Yet more of the same battle._

By then came into field king Ban as fierce as a lion, with bands of
green and thereupon gold. Ha, ha, said king Lot, we must be
discomfited, for yonder I see the most valiant knight of the world, and
the man of the most renown: for such two brethren as is king Ban and
king Bors are not living, wherefore we must needs void or die; and but
if we avoid manly and wisely there is but death. When king Ban came
into the battle, he came in so fiercely that the strokes resounded
again from the wood and the water; wherefore king Lot wept for pity and
dole that he saw so many good knights take their end. But through the
great force of king Ban they made both the northern battles that were
parted to hurtle together for great dread, and the three kings with
their knights slew on ever, that it was pity to behold that multitude
of the people that fled. But king Lot and the king of the hundred
knights and king Morganore gathered the people together passing
knightly, and did great prowess of arms, and held the battle all that
day like hard. When the king of the hundred knights beheld the great
damage that king Ban did, he thrust unto him with his horse, and smote
him on high upon the helm a great stroke, and astonied him sore. Then
king Ban was wroth with him, and followed on him fiercely: the other
saw that, and cast up his shield and spurred his horse forward, but the
stroke of king Ban fell down and carved a cantel of the shield, and the
sword slid down by the hauberk behind his back, and cut through the
trapping of steel, and the horse even in two pieces, that the sword
felt the earth. Then the king of the hundred knights voided the horse
lightly, and with his sword he broched the horse of king Ban through
and through. With that king Ban voided lightly from the dead horse, and
then king Ban smote at the other so eagerly and smote him on the helm,
that he fell to the earth. Also in that ire he felled king Morganore,
and there was great slaughter of good knights and much people. By then
came into the press king Arthur, and found king Ban standing among dead
men and dead horses, fighting on foot as a wood lion, that there came
none nigh him as far as he might reach with his sword but that he
caught a grievous buffet; whereof king Arthur had great pity. And
Arthur was so bloody that by his shield there might no man know him,
for all was blood and brains on his sword. And as Arthur looked by him
he saw a knight that was passing well horsed, and therewith Sir Arthur
ran to him and smote him on the helm that his sword went unto his
teeth, and the knight sank down to the earth dead, and anon Arthur took
the horse by the rein and led him unto king Ban, and said, Fair brother
have this horse, for ye have great need thereof, and me repenteth sore
of your great damage. It shall be soon revenged, said king Ban, for I
trust mine use is not such but some of them may sore repent this. I
will well, said Arthur, for I see your deeds full actual; nevertheless,
I might not come at you at that time. But when king Ban was mounted on
horseback, then there began new battle the which was sore and hard, and
passing great slaughter. And so through great force king Arthur, and
king Ban, and king Bors made their knights a little to withdraw them.
But always the eleven kings with their chivalry never turned back, and
so withdrew them to a little wood, and so over a little river, and
there they rested them, for on the night they might have no rest in the
field. And then the eleven kings and knights put them on a heap all
together, as men adread and out of all comfort. But there was no man
might pass them, they held them so hard together, both behind and
before, that king Arthur had marvel of their deeds of arms, and was
passing wroth. Ah, Sir Arthur, said king Ban and king Bors, blame them
not, for they do as good men ought to do. For by my faith, said king
Ban, they are the best fighting men and knights of most prowess that
ever I saw or heard speak of, and those eleven kings are men of great
worship, and if they were belonging unto you there were no king under
the heaven had such eleven knights, and of such worship. I may not love
them, said Arthur, they would destroy me. That wot we well, said king
Ban and king Bors, for they are your mortal enemies, and that hath been
proved aforehand, and this day they have done their part, and that is
great pity of their wilfulness.

Then all the eleven kings drew them together, and then said king Lot:
Lords, ye must other ways than ye do, or else the great loss is behind:
ye may see what people we have lost, and what good men we lose, because
we wait always upon these footmen, and ever in saving of one of the
footmen we lose ten horsemen for him; therefore this is mine advice,
let us put our footmen from us, for it is near night, for the noble
Arthur will not tarry on the footmen, for they may save themselves, the
wood is near hand. And when we horsemen be together, look every each of
you kings let make such ordinance that none break upon pain of death.
And who that seeth any man dress him to flee, lightly that he be slain,
for it is better that we slay a coward than through a coward all we to
be slain. How say ye? said king Lot, answer me, all ye kings. It is
well said, quoth king Nentres; so said the king of the hundred knights;
the same said the king Carados, and king Uriens; so did king Idres, and
king Brandegoris; and so did king Cradelmas, and the duke of Cambenet;
the same said king Clariance, and king Agwisance;—and sware they would
never fail other, neither for life nor for death. And whoso that fled,
but did as they did, should be slain. Then they amended their harness,
and righted their shields, and took new spears and set them on their
thighs, and stood still as it had been a plump of wood.


                               CHAP. XV.

_Yet more of the said battle, and how it was ended by Merlin._

When Sir Arthur and King Ban and Bors beheld them and all their
knights, they praised them much for their noble cheer of chivalry, for
the hardiest fighters that ever they heard or saw. With that there
dressed them a forty noble knights, and said unto the three kings they
would break their battle: these were their names: Lionses, Phariance,
Ulfius, Brastias, Ector, Kay, Lucas the butler, Griflet la Fise de
Dieu, Mariet de la Roche, Guynas de Bloy, Briant de la Forest Savage,
Bellaus, Morians of the Castle of Maidens, Flannedrius of the Castle of
Ladies, Annecians that was king Bors’s godson, a noble knight, Ladinas
de la Rouse, Emerause, Caulas, and Graciens le Castlein, one Bloise de
la Case, and Sir Colgrevaunce de Gorre. All these knights rode on afore
with spears on their thighs, and spurred their horses mightily as the
horses might run. And the eleven kings with part of their knights
rushed with their horses as fast as they might with their spears, and
there they did on both parties marvellous deeds of arms. So came into
the thick of the press Arthur, Ban, and Bors, and slew down right on
both hands, that their horses went in blood up to the fetlocks. But
ever the eleven kings and their host were ever in the visage of Arthur.
Wherefore Ban and Bors had great marvel, considering the great
slaughter that there was, but at the last they were driven aback over a
little river. With that came Merlin on a great black horse, and said
unto Arthur: Thou hast never done: hast thou not done enough? of
three-score thousand this day hast thou left on live but fifteen
thousand, and it is time to say Ho! For God is wroth with thee that
thou wilt never have done, for yonder eleven kings at this time will
not be overthrown, but and thou tarry on them any longer thy fortune
will turn and they shall increase. And therefore withdraw you unto your
lodging, and rest you as soon as ye may, and reward your good knights
with gold and with silver, for they have well deserved it; there may no
riches be too dear for them, for of so few men as ye have there were
never men did more of prowess than they have done to day, for ye have
matched this day with the best fighters of the world. That is truth,
said king Ban and Bors. Also said Merlin, withdraw you where ye list,
for this three year I dare undertake they shall not dare you; and by
then ye shall hear new tidings. And then Merlin said unto Arthur: These
eleven kings have more on hand than they are ware of, for the Saracens
are landed in their countries, more than forty thousand that burn and
slay, and have laid siege at the castle Wandesborow, and made great
destruction; therefore dread you not this three year. Also Sir, all the
goods that be gotten at this battle let it be searched: and when ye
have it in your hands let it be given freely unto these two kings, Ban
and Bors, that they may reward their knights withal; and that shall
cause strangers to be of better will to do you service at need. Also ye
be able to reward your own knights of your own goods whensoever it
liketh you. It is well said, quoth Arthur, and as thou hast devised so
shall it be done. When it was delivered to Ban and Bors, they gave the
goods as freely to their knights as it was given them.

Then Merlin took his leave of Arthur and of the two kings, for to go
and see his master Bleise that dwelt in Northumberland, and so he
departed and came to his master, that was passing glad of his coming.
And there he told how Arthur and the two kings had sped at the great
battle, and how it was ended, and told the names of every king and
knight of worship that was there. And so Bleise wrote the battle, word
by word, as Merlin told him, how it began, and by whom, and in likewise
how it was ended, and who had the worse. All the battles that were done
in Arthur’s days Merlin did his master Bleise do write. Also, he did do
write all the battles that every worthy knight did of Arthur’s court.
After this Merlin departed from his master and came to king Arthur,
that was in the castle of Bedegraine, that was one of the castles that
stood in the forest of Sherwood. And Merlin was so disguised that king
Arthur knew him not, for he was all befurred in black sheepskins, and a
great pair of boots, and a bow and arrows, in a russet gown, and
brought wild geese in his hand, and it was on the morn after Candlemas
Day, but king Arthur knew him not. Sir, said Merlin unto the king, will
ye give me a gift? Wherefore said king Arthur should I give thee a
gift, churl? Sir, said Merlin, ye were better to give me a gift that is
not in your hand, than to lose great riches; for here, in the same
place where the great battle was, is great treasure hid in the earth.
Who told thee so, churl? said Arthur. Merlin told me so, said he. Then
Ulfius and Brastias knew him well enough, and smiled. Sir, said these
two knights, it is Merlin that so speaketh unto you. Then king Arthur
was greatly abashed, and had marvel of Merlin, and so had king Ban and
king Bors, and so they had great disport at him.

So, in the mean while, there came a damsel which was an earl’s
daughter, and his name was Sanam, and her name was Lionors, a passing
fair damsel, and so she came thither for to do homage, as other lords
did after the great battle. And king Arthur set his love greatly upon
her, and so did she upon him, and she bare a child and his name was
Borre, that was after a good knight, and of the Table Round. Then there
came word that the king Rience of North Wales made great war upon king
Leodegrance of Cameliard, for the which thing Arthur was wroth, for he
loved him well and hated king Rience, for he was always against him. So
by ordinance of the three kings that was sent home to Benwick, all they
would depart for dread of king Claudas; Phariance, and Antemes, and
Gratian, and Lionses of Payarne, with the leaders of those that should
keep the kings’ lands.


                               CHAP. XVI.

_How king Arthur, king Ban, and king Bors rescued king Leodegrance, and
  other incidents._

And then king Arthur and king Ban and king Bors departed with their
fellowship, a twenty thousand, and came within six days into the
country of Cameliard, and there rescued king Leodegrance and slew there
much people of king Rience unto the number of ten thousand men, and put
him to flight. And then had these three kings great cheer of king
Leodegrance that thanked them of their great goodness, that they would
revenge him of his enemies. And there had Arthur the first sight of
Guenever, the king’s daughter of Cameliard, and ever after he loved
her. After they were wedded, as it telleth in the book. So, briefly to
make an end, they took their leave to go into their own countries, for
king Claudas did great destruction on their lands. Then said Arthur, I
will go with you. Nay, said the kings, ye shall not at this time, for
ye have much to do yet in these lands, therefore we will depart, and
with the great goods that we have gotten in these lands by your gifts,
we shall wage good knights, and withstand the king Claudas’s malice,
for, by the grace of God, and we have need we will send to you for your
succour; and if ye have need, send for us, and we will not tarry, by
the faith of our bodies. It shall not, said Merlin, need that these two
kings come again in the way of war: but I know well king Arthur may not
be long from you, for within a year or two ye shall have great need,
and then shall he revenge you on your enemies, as ye have done on his.
For these eleven kings shall die all in a day, by the great might and
prowess of arms of two valiant knights (as it telleth after) their
names being Balin le Savage, and Balan his brother, which be marvellous
good knights as be any living.

Now turn we to the eleven kings, that returned unto a city that hight
Sorhaute, the which city was within king Uriens, and there they
refreshed them as well as they might, and made leeches search their
wounds, and sorrowed greatly for the death of their people. With that
there came a messager and told how there was come into their lands
people that were lawless as well as Saracens a forty thousand, and have
burnt and slain all the people that they may come by without mercy and
have laid siege on the castle of Wandesborow. Alas! said the eleven
kings, here is sorrow on sorrow, and if we had not warred against
Arthur as we had done, he would soon revenge us: as for king
Leodegrance, he loveth king Arthur better than us, and as for king
Rience he hath enough to do with king Leodegrance, for he hath laid
siege unto him. So they consented together to keep all the marches of
Cornwall, of Wales, and of the North. So first they put king Idres in
the city of Nauntes in Britain with four thousand men of arms, to watch
both the water and the land. Also they put in the city of Windesan king
Nentres of Garlot with four thousand knights, to watch both on water
and on land. Also they had of other men of war more than eight
thousand, for to fortify all the fortresses in the marches of Cornwall.
Also they put more knights in all the marches of Wales and Scotland
with many good men of arms. And so they kept them together the space of
three years, and ever allied them with mighty kings, and dukes, and
lords. And to them fell king Rience of North Wales, the which was a
mighty man of men, and Nero that was a mighty man of men. And all this
while they furnished them and garnished them of good men of arms and
victual, and of all manner of habiliment that pretendeth to the war, to
avenge them for the battle of Bedegraine, as it telleth in the book of
adventures following.


                              CHAP. XVII.

_How king Arthur rode to Carlion, and of his dream, and how he saw the
  questing beast._

Then after the departing of king Ban and of king Bors king Arthur rode
unto Carlion. And thither came to him Lot’s wife of Orkney, in manner
of a messenger, but she was sent thither to espy the court of king
Arthur; and she came richly beseen with her four sons, Gawaine,
Gaheris, Agravaine, and Gareth, with many other knights and ladies, and
she was a passing fair lady, wherefore the king cast great love unto
her, and so was Mordred born, and she was his sister, on the mother
side Igraine. So there she rested her a month, and at the last
departed. Then the king dreamed a marvellous dream whereof he was sore
adread. But all this time king Arthur knew not that king Lot’s wife was
his sister. Thus was the dream of Arthur. Him thought that there was
come into this land griffons and serpents, and him thought they burnt
and slew all the people in the land, and then him thought he fought
with them, and they did him passing great harm and wounded him full
sore, but at the last he slew them. When the king awaked he was passing
heavy of his dream, and so to put it out of thoughts he made him ready
with many knights to ride on hunting. As soon as he was in the forest
the king saw a great hart afore him. This hart will I chase, said king
Arthur, and so he spurred the horse and rode after long, and so by fine
force oft he was like to have smitten the hart, till the king had
chased the hart so long that his horse had lost his breath, and fell
down dead. Then a yeoman fetched the king another horse. So the king
saw the hart embushed and his horse dead; he sat him down by a
fountain, and there he fell in great thoughts; and as he sat so him
thought he heard a noise of hounds, to the sum of thirty. And with that
the king saw coming toward him the strangest beast that ever he saw or
heard of; so the beast went to the well and drank, and the noise was in
the beast’s belly like unto the questing of thirty couple hounds; but
all the while the beast drank there was no noise in the beast’s belly,
and therewith the beast departed with a great noise, whereof the king
had great marvel. And so he was in great thought, and therewith he fell
on sleep. Right so there came a knight afoot unto Arthur, and said,
Knight, full of thought and sleepy, tell me if thou sawest a strange
beast pass this way. Such one saw I, said king Arthur, that is past two
miles: what would you with the beast? said Arthur. Sir, I have followed
that beast long time, and have killed my horse; so would I had another
to follow my quest. Right so came one with the king’s horse, and when
the knight saw the horse he prayed the king to give him the horse, For
I have followed this quest this twelvemonth, and either I shall achieve
him or bleed of the best blood of my body. Pellinore that time king
followed the questing beast, and after his death Sir Palomides followed
it.


                              CHAP. XVIII.

_How king Pellinore took Arthur’s horse and followed the questing
  beast, and how Merlin met with Arthur._

Sir knight, said the king, leave that quest and suffer me to have it,
and I will follow it another twelve month. Ah fool, said the knight
unto Arthur, it is in vain thy desire, for it shall never be achieved
but by me, or my next kin. Therewith he stert unto the king’s horse,
and mounted into the saddle, and said, Gramercy, this horse is mine
own. Well, said the king, thou mayest take my horse by force, but and I
might prove thee whether thou wert better on horseback or I. Well, said
the knight, seek me here when thou wilt, and here nigh this well thou
shalt find me; and so passed on his way. Then the king sat in a study,
and bad his men fetch his horse as fast as ever they might. Right so
came by him Merlin like a child of fourteen year of age, and saluted
the king, and asked him why he was so pensive? I may well be pensive,
said the king, for I have seen the marvellest sight that ever I saw.
That know I well, said Merlin, as well as thyself, and of all thy
thoughts; but thou art but a fool to take thought, for it will not
amend thee. Also I know what thou art, and who was thy father, and of
whom thou wert born; king Uther Pendragon was thy father, and had thee
of Igraine. That is false, said king Arthur; how shouldest thou know
it? for thou art not so old of years to know my father. Yes, said
Merlin, I know it better than ye or any man living. I will not believe
thee, said Arthur, and was wroth with the child. So departed Merlin;
and came again in the likeness of an old man of fourscore years of age,
whereof the king was right glad, for he seemed to be right wise.

Then said the old man, Why are ye so sad? I may well be heavy, said
Arthur, for many things. Also here was a child, and told me many things
that me seemeth he should not know, for he was not of age to know my
father. Yes, said the old man, the child told you truth, and more would
he have told you and ye would have suffered him. But ye have done a
thing late that God is displeased with you, and your sister shall have
a child that shall destroy you and all the knights of your realm. What
are ye, said Arthur, that tell me these tidings? I am Merlin, and I was
he in the child’s likeness. Ah, said king Arthur, ye are a marvellous
man, but I marvel much of thy words that I must die in battle. Marvel
not, said Merlin, for it is God’s will your body to be punished for
your foul deeds. But I may well be sorry, said Merlin, for I shall die
a shameful death, to be put in the earth quick, and ye shall die a
worshipful death. And as they talked this, came one with the king’s
horse, and so the king mounted on his horse and Merlin on another, and
so rode unto Carlion. And anon the king asked Ector and Ulfius how he
was born. And they told him that Uther Pendragon was his father, and
queen Igraine his mother: then he said to Merlin, I will that my mother
be sent for, that I may speak with her, and if she say so herself, then
will I believe it. In all haste the queen was sent for, and she came
and brought with her Morgan le Fay her daughter, that was as fair a
lady as any might be. And the king welcomed Igraine in the best manner.


                               CHAP. XIX.

_How Ulfius appeached queen Igraine, Arthur’s mother, of treason: and
  how a knight came and desired to have the death of his master
  revenged._

Right so came Ulfius and said openly, that the king and all might hear
that were feasted that day, Ye are the falsest lady of the world, and
the most traitress unto the king’s person. Beware, said Arthur, what
thou sayest; thou speakest a great word. I am well ware, said Sir
Ulfius, what I speak, and here is my glove to prove it upon any man
that will say the contrary, that this queen Igraine is causer of your
great damage, and of your great war. For, and she would have uttered it
in the life of king Uther Pendragon of the birth of you, ye had never
had half the mortal wars that ye have had: for the most part of your
barons of your realm knew never whose son ye were, nor of whom ye were
born. And she that bear you should have made it known openly in
excusing of her worship and yours, and in likewise to all the realm;
wherefore I prove her false to God and to you and to all your realm,
and who will say the contrary I will prove it upon his body.

Then spake Igraine and said, I am a woman, and I may not fight, but
rather than I should be dishonoured there would some good man take my
quarrel. More she said, Merlin knoweth well, and ye Sir Ulfius, how
king Uther came to me in the castle of Tintagel, in the likeness of my
lord that was dead three hours tofore. And after my lord was dead king
Uther wedded me, and by his commandment when the child was born it was
delivered unto Merlin, and nourished by him, and so I saw the child
never after, nor wot not what is his name, for I knew him never yet.
And there Ulfius said to the queen, Merlin is more to blame than ye.
Well I wot, said the queen, that I bare a child by my lord king Uther,
but I wot not where he is become. Then Merlin took the king by the
hand, saying, This is your mother. And therewith Sir Ector bare witness
how he nourished him by Uther’s commandment. And, therewith king Arthur
took his mother queen Igraine in his arms and kissed her and either
wept upon other. And then the king let make a feast that lasted eight
days. Then on a day there came into the court a squire on horseback,
leading a knight before him wounded to the death, and told him how
there was a knight in the forest had reared up a pavilion by a well,
and hath slain my master, a good knight, his name was Miles; wherefore
I beseech you that my master may be buried, and that some knight may
revenge my master’s death. Then the noise was great of that knight’s
death in the court, and every man said his advice: then came Griflet
that was but a squire, and he was but young, of the age of king Arthur;
so he besought the king for all his service that he had done him to
give him the order of knighthood.


                               CHAP. XX.

_How Griflet was made knight, and justed with a knight._

Thou art full young and tender of age, said Arthur, for to take so high
an order on thee. Sir, said Griflet, I beseech you make me knight. Sir,
said Merlin, it were great pity to lose Griflet, for he will be a
passing good man when he is of age, abiding with you the term of his
life. And if he adventure his body with yonder knight at the fountain
it is in great peril if ever he come again, for he is one of the best
knights of the world, and the strongest man of arms. Well, said king
Arthur. So at the desire of Griflet the king made him knight. Now, said
Arthur unto Sir Griflet, since I have made you knight, thou must give
me a gift. What ye will, said Griflet. Thou shalt promise me by the
faith of thy body, when thou hast justed with the knight at the
fountain, whether it fall ye be on foot or on horseback, that right so
ye shall come again unto me without making any more debate. I will
promise you, said Griflet, as you desire. Then took Griflet his horse
in great haste, and dressed his shield, and took a spear in his hand,
and so he rode a great wallop till he came to the fountain, and thereby
he saw a rich pavilion, and thereby under a cloth stood a fair horse
well saddled and bridled, and on a tree a shield of divers colours, and
a great spear. Then Griflet smote on the shield with the butt of his
spear that the shield fell down to the ground. With that the knight
came out of the pavilion and said, Fair knight, why smote ye down my
shield? For I will just with you, said Griflet. It is better ye do not,
said the knight, for ye are but young, and late made knight, and your
might is nothing to mine. As for that, said Griflet, I will just with
you. That is me loth, said the knight, but since I must needs I will
dress me thereto: of whence be ye? said the knight. Sir, I am of
Arthur’s court. So the two knights ran together, that Griflet’s spear
all to-shivered, and therewithal he smote Griflet through the shield
and the left side, and brake the spear, that the truncheon stack in his
body, that horse and knight fell down.


                               CHAP. XXI.

_How twelve knights came from Rome and asked truage for this land of
  Arthur, and how Arthur fought with a knight._

When the knight saw him lie so on the ground he alighted, and was
passing heavy, for he wend he had slain him, and then he unlaced his
helm and gat him wind, and so with the truncheon he set him on his
horse and gat him wind, and so betook him to God, and said he had a
mighty heart, and if he might live he would prove a passing good
knight. And so Sir Griflet rode to the court, where great dole was made
for him. But through good leeches he was healed and saved.

Right so came into the court twelve knights, and were aged men, and
they came from the emperor of Rome, and they asked of Arthur truage for
this realm, other else the emperor would destroy him and his land.
Well, said king Arthur, ye are messagers, therefore may ye say what ye
will, other else ye should die therefore. But this is mine answer; I
owe the emperor no truage, nor none will I hold him; but on a fair
field I shall give him my truage, that shall be with a sharp spear or
else with a sharp sword, and that shall not be long, by my father’s
soul, Uther Pendragon. And therewith the messagers departed passingly
wroth, and king Arthur as wroth, for in evil time came they then, for
the king was passingly wroth for the hurt of Sir Griflet. And so he
commanded a privyman of his chamber, that or it be day his best horse
and armour, with all that belongeth unto his person, be without the
city or to-morrow day. Right so, or to-morrow day, he met with his man
and his horse, and so mounted up, and dressed his shield, and took his
spear, and bade his chamberlain tarry there till he came again.

And so Arthur rode a soft pace till it was day, and then was he aware
of three churls chasing Merlin, and would have slain him. Then the king
rode unto them and bade them, Flee churls! Then were they afeard when
they saw a knight, and fled. O Merlin, said Arthur, here haddest thou
been slain for all thy crafts, had I not been. Nay, said Merlin, not
so, for I could save myself an I would, and thou art more near thy
death than I am, for thou goest to the death-ward, and God be not thy
friend. So as they went thus talking they came to the fountain, and the
rich pavilion there by it. Then king Arthur was ware where sat a knight
armed in a chair. Sir knight, said Arthur, for what cause abidest thou
here, that there may no knight ride this way but if he just with thee,
said the king: I rede thee leave that custom, said Arthur. This custom,
said the knight, have I used and will use maugre who saith nay; and who
is grieved with my custom let him amend it that will. I will amend it,
said Arthur. I shall defend thee, said the knight. Anon he took his
horse, and dressed his shield, and took a spear, and they met so hard
either in other’s shields that they all to-shivered their spears.
Therewith Arthur anon pulled out his sword. Nay, not so, said the
knight, it is fairer that we twain run more together with sharp spears.
I will well, said Arthur, and I had any more spears. I have enow, said
the knight. So there came a squire, and brought two good spears, and
Arthur chose one and he another, so they spurred their horses, and came
together with all their mights, that either brake their spears to their
hands. Then Arthur set hand on his sword. Nay, said the knight, ye
shall do better; ye are a passing good juster as ever I met withal, and
once for the love of the high order of knighthood let us just once
again. I assent me, said Arthur. Anon there were brought two great
spears, and every knight gat a spear, and therewith they ran together
that Arthur’s spear all to-shivered. But the other knight hit him so
hard in midst of the shield that horse and man fell to the earth, and
therewith Arthur was eager, and pulled out his sword, and said, I will
assay thee, Sir knight, on foot, for I have lost the honour on
horseback. I will be on horseback, said the knight. Then was Arthur
wroth, and dressed his shield towards him with his sword drawn. When
the knight saw that, he alight, for him thought no worship to have a
knight at such avail, he to be on horseback, and he on foot, and so he
alight and dressed his shield unto Arthur. And there began a strong
battle with many great strokes, and so hewed with their swords that the
cantels flew in the fields, and much blood they bled both, that all the
place there as they fought was over-bled with blood, and thus they
fought long, and rested them, and then they went to the battle again,
and so hurtled together like two rams that either fell to the earth. So
at the last they smote together, that both their swords met even
together. But the sword of the knight smote king Arthur’s sword in two
pieces, wherefore he was heavy. Then said the knight unto Arthur, Thou
art in my danger whether me list to save thee or slay thee, and but
thou yield thee as overcome and recreant thou shalt die. As for death,
said king Arthur, welcome be it when it cometh; but to yield me unto
thee as recreant I had lever die than to be so shamed. And therewithal
the king leapt unto Pellinore, and took him by the middle, and threw
him down, and rased off his helmet. When the knight felt that he was
adread, for he was a passing big man of might, and anon he brought
Arthur under him, and rased off his helm, and would have smitten off
his head.


                              CHAP. XXII.

_How Merlin saved Arthur’s life, and threw an enchantment upon king
  Pellinore, and made him to sleep._

Therewithal came Merlin, and said, Knight, hold thy hand, for and thou
slay that knight thou puttest this realm in the greatest damage that
ever was realm: for this knight is a man of more worship than thou
wotest of. Why, who is he? said the knight. It is king Arthur. Then
would he have slain him for dread of his wrath, and heaved up his
sword, and therewith Merlin cast an enchantment to the knight, that he
fell to the earth in a great sleep. Then Merlin took up king Arthur,
and rode forth on the knight’s horse. Alas, said Arthur, what hast thou
done, Merlin? hast thou slain this good knight by thy crafts? There
lived not so worshipful a knight as he was; I had lever than the stint
of my land a year that he were onlive. Care ye not, said Merlin, for he
is wholer than ye, for he is but on sleep, and will awake within three
hours. I told you, said Merlin, what a knight he was; here had ye be
slain had I not been. Also there liveth not a bigger knight than he is
one, and he shall hereafter do you right good service, and his name is
Pellinore, and he shall have two sons that shall be passing good men;
save one, they shall have no fellow of prowess and of good living; and
their names shall be Percivale of Wales and Lamerake of Wales: and he
shall tell you the name of your sister’s son that shall be the
destruction of all this realm.


                              CHAP. XXIII.

_How Arthur by the mean of Merlin gat Excalibur his sword of the Lady
  of the lake._

Right so the king and he departed, and went until an hermit that was a
good man and a great leach. So the hermit searched all his wounds and
gave him good salves; so the king was there three days, and then were
his wounds well amended that he might ride and go, and so departed. And
as they rode, Arthur said, I have no sword. No force, said Merlin,
hereby is a sword that shall be yours and I may. So they rode till they
came to a lake, the which was a fair water and broad, and in the midst
of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm clothed in white samite, that
held a fair sword in that hand. Lo, said Merlin, yonder is that sword
that I spake of. With that they saw a damsel going upon the lake: What
damsel is that? said Arthur. That is the Lady of the lake, said Merlin;
and within that lake is a rock, and therein is as fair a place as any
on earth, and richly beseen, and this damsel will come to you anon, and
then speak ye fair to her that she will give you that sword. Anon
withal came the damsel unto Arthur and saluted him, and he her again.
Damsel, said Arthur, what sword is that, that yonder the arm holdeth
above the water? I would it were mine, for I have no sword. Sir Arthur
king, said the damsel, that sword is mine, and if ye will give me a
gift when I ask it you, ye shall have it. By my faith, said Arthur, I
will give you what gift ye will ask. Well, said the damsel, go ye into
yonder barge and row yourself to the sword, and take it and the
scabbard with you, and I will ask my gift when I see my time. So Sir
Arthur and Merlin alight, and tied their horses to two trees, and so
they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword that the hand
held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it with him. And
the arm and the hand went under the water; and so they came unto the
land and rode forth. And then Sir Arthur saw a rich pavilion: What
signifieth yonder pavilion? It is the knight’s pavilion, said Merlin,
that ye fought with last, Sir Pellinore, but he is out, he is not
there; he hath ado with a knight of yours, that hight Egglame, and they
have fought together, but at the last Egglame fled, and else he had
been dead, and he hath chased him even to Carlion, and we shall meet
with him anon in the high way. That is well said, said Arthur, now have
I a sword, now will I wage battle with him and be avenged on him. Sir,
ye shall not so, said Merlin, for the knight is weary of fighting and
chasing, so that ye shall have no worship to have ado with him; also he
will not lightly be matched of one knight living; and therefore it is
my counsel, let him pass, for he shall do you good service in short
time, and his sons after his days. Also ye shall see that day in short
space, ye shall be right glad to give him your sister to wed. When I
see him, I will do as ye advise me, said Arthur. Then Sir Arthur looked
on the sword, and liked it passing well. Whether liketh you better,
said Merlin, the sword or the scabbard? Me liketh better the sword,
said Arthur. Ye are more unwise, said Merlin, for the scabbard is worth
ten of the sword, for while ye have the scabbard upon you ye shall
never lose no blood, be ye never so sore wounded, therefore keep well
the scabbard always with you. So they rode unto Carlion, and by the way
they met with Sir Pellinore; but Merlin had done such a craft that
Pellinore saw not Arthur, and he passed by without any words. I marvel,
said Arthur, that the knight would not speak. Sir, said Merlin, he saw
you not, for and he had seen you ye had not lightly departed. So they
came unto Carlion, whereof his knights were passing glad. And when they
heard of his adventures they marvelled that he would jeopard his person
so alone. But all men of worship said it was merry to be under such a
chieftain that would put his person in adventure as other poor knights
did.


                              CHAP. XXIV.

_How tidings came to Arthur that king Ryons had overcome eleven kings,
  and how he desired Arthur’s beard to trim his mantle._

This meanwhile came a messager from king Ryons of North Wales, and king
he was of all Ireland, and of many Isles. And this was his message,
greeting well king Arthur in this manner wise, saying that king Ryons
had discomfited and overcome eleven kings, and every each of them did
him homage, and that was this—they gave him their beards clean flayed
off, as much as there was; wherefore the messager came for king
Arthur’s beard. For king Ryons had trimmed a mantle with kings’ beards,
and there lacked one place of the mantle, wherefore he sent for his
beard, or else he would enter into his lands, and burn and slay, and
never leave till he have the head and the beard. Well, said Arthur,
thou hast said thy message, the which is the most villainous and
lewdest message that ever man heard sent unto a king: also thou mayest
see my beard is full young yet to make a trimming of it. But tell thou
thy king this: I owe him none homage, nor none of mine elders; but or
it be long he shall do me homage on both his knees, or else he shall
lose his head, by the faith of my body, for this is the most
shamefulest message that ever I heard speak of. I see well thy king met
never yet with worshipful man, but tell him I will have his head
without he do me homage. Then the messager departed. Now is there any
here, said Arthur, that knoweth king Ryons? Then answered a knight that
hight Naram, Sir, I know the king well; he is a passing good man of his
body as few be living, and a passing proud man; and, Sir, doubt ye not
he will make war on you with a mighty puissance. Well, said Arthur, I
shall ordain for him in short time.


                               CHAP. XXV.

_How all the children were sent for that were born on May-day, and how
  Mordred was saved._

Then king Arthur let send for all the children born on May-day of lords
and ladies, for Merlin told king Arthur that he that should destroy him
should be born on May-day, wherefore he sent for them all upon pain of
death. And so there were found many lords’ sons, and all were sent unto
the king, and so was Mordred sent by king Lot’s wife, and all were put
in a ship to the sea, and some were four weeks old, and some less. And
so by fortune the ship drove unto a castle, and was all to-riven, and
destroyed the most part, save that Mordred was cast up, and a good man
found him, and nourished him till he was fourteen year old, and then he
brought him to the court, as it rehearseth afterward toward the end of
the Death of Arthur. So many lords and barons of this realm were
displeased, for their children were so lost, and many put the blame on
Merlin more than on Arthur; so what for dread and for love they held
their peace. But when the messager came to king Ryons then was he wood
out of measure, and purveyed him for a great host, as it rehearseth
after in the book of Balin le Savage that followeth next after, how by
adventure Balin gat the sword.

             Explicit liber primus. Incipit liber secundus.




                            Book the Second.


                                CHAP. I.

_Of a damsel which came girt with a sword for to find a man of such
  virtue to draw it out of the scabbard._

After the death of Uther Pendragon reigned Arthur his son, the which
had great war in his days for to get all England into his hand. For
there were many kings within the realm of England, and in Wales,
Scotland, and Cornwall. So it befel on a time when king Arthur was at
London, there came a knight and told the king tidings how that the king
Ryons of North Wales had reared a great number of people, and were
entered into the land, and burnt and slew the king’s true liege people.
If this be true, said Arthur, it were great shame unto mine estate but
that he were mightily withstood. It is truth, said the knight, for I
saw the host myself. Well, said the king, let make a cry, that all the
lords, knights, and gentlemen of arms, should draw unto a castle,
called Camelot in those days, and there the king would let make a
council general, and a great justs.

So when the king was come thither with all his baronage, and lodged as
they seemed best, there was come a damsel the which was sent on message
from the great lady Lile of Avelion. And when she came before king
Arthur, she told from whom she came, and how she was sent on message
unto him for these causes. Then she let her mantle fall that was richly
furred; and then was she girt with a noble sword, whereof the king had
marvel, and said, Damsel, for what cause are ye girt with that sword?
it beseemeth you not. Now shall I tell you, said the damsel: this sword
that I am girt withal doth me great sorrow and cumberance, for I may
not be delivered of this sword but by a knight, but he must be a
passing good man of his hands and of his deeds, and without villainy or
treachery, and without treason. And if I may find such a knight that
hath all these virtues, he may draw out this sword out of the sheath.
For I have been at king Ryons’; it was told me there were passing good
knights, and he and all his knights have assayed it, and none can
speed. This is a great marvel, said Arthur; if this be sooth, I will
myself assay to draw out the sword, not presuming upon myself that I am
the best knight, but that I will begin to draw at your sword in giving
example to all the barons, that they shall assay every one after other
when I have assayed it. Then Arthur took the sword by the sheath and by
the girdle, and pulled at it eagerly, but the sword would not out. Sir,
said the damsel, ye need not to pull half so hard, for he that shall
pull it out, shall do it with little might. Ye say well, said Arthur:
now assay ye, all my barons, but beware ye be not defiled with shame,
treachery, nor guile. Then it will not avail, said the damsel, for he
must be a clean knight without villainy, and of a gentle stock of
father side and mother side. Most of all the barons of the Round Table
that were there at that time assayed all by row, but there might none
speed; wherefore the damsel made great sorrow out of measure, and said,
Alas! I wend in this court had been the best knights, without treachery
or treason. By my faith, saith Arthur, here are good knights as I deem
any been in the world, but their grace is not to help you, wherefore I
am displeased.


                               CHAP. II.

_How Balin, arrayed like a poor knight, pulled out the sword, which
  afterward was cause of his death._

Then fell it so that time there was a poor knight with king Arthur,
that had been prisoner with him half a year and more, for slaying of a
knight the which was cousin unto king Arthur. The name of this knight
was called Balin, and by good means of the barons he was delivered out
of prison, for he was a good man named of his body, and he was born in
Northumberland. And so he went privily into the court, and saw this
adventure, whereof it raised his heart, and he would assay it as other
knights did, but for he was poor and poorly arrayed he put him not far
in press; but in his heart he was fully assured to do as well, if his
grace happed him, as any knight that there was. And as the damsel took
her leave of Arthur and of all the barons, so departing, this knight
Balin called unto her and said, Damsel, I pray you of your courtesy
suffer me as well to assay as these lords; though that I be so poorly
clothed, in mine heart me seemeth I am fully assured as some of these
other, and me seemeth in my heart to speed right well. The damsel
beheld the poor knight, and saw he was a likely man, but for of his
poor arrayment she thought he should be of no worship without villainy
or treachery. And then she said unto the knight, Sir, it needeth not to
put me to more pain or labour, for it seemeth not you to speed there as
other have failed. Ah, fair damsel, said Balin, worthiness and good
qualities and good deeds are not all only in arrayment, but manhood and
worship is hid within man’s person, and many a worshipful knight is not
known unto all people, and therefore worship and hardiness is not in
arrayment. Ye say sooth, said the damsel, therefore ye shall assay to
do what ye may. Then Balin took the sword by the girdle and sheath and
drew it out easily, and when he looked on the sword it pleased him
much. Then had the king and all the barons great marvel that Balin had
done that adventure, and many knights had great despite of Balin.
Certes, said the damsel, this is a passing good knight, and the best
that ever I found, and most of worship without treason, treachery, or
villainy, and many marvels shall he do. Now, gentle and courteous
knight, give me the sword again. Nay, said Balin, for this sword will I
keep, but it be taken from me by force. Well, said the damsel, ye are
not wise to keep the sword from me, for ye shall slay with the sword
the best friend that ye have, and the man that ye most love in the
world, and the sword shall be your destruction. I shall take the
adventure, said Balin, that God will ordain me, but the sword ye shall
not have at this time, by the faith of my body. Ye shall repent it
within short time, said the damsel, for I would have the sword more for
your avail than for mine, for I am passing heavy for your sake; for ye
will not believe that sword shall be your destruction, and that is
great pity. With that the damsel departed, making great sorrow.

Anon after Balin sent for his horse and his armour, and so would depart
from the court, and took his leave of king Arthur. Nay, said the king,
I suppose ye will not depart so lightly from this fellowship. I suppose
that ye are displeased that I have shewed you unkindness; blame me the
less, for I was misinformed against you, but I wend you had not been
such a knight as ye are of worship and prowess, and if ye will abide in
this court among my fellowship, I shall so advance you as ye shall be
pleased. God thank your highness, said Balin, for your bounty and
highness may no man praise half to the value; but at this time I must
needs depart, beseeching you alway of your good grace. Truly, said the
king, I am right wroth for your departing: I pray you, fair knight,
that ye tarry not long, and ye shall be right welcome to me and to my
barons, and I shall amend all amiss that I have done against you. God
thank your great lordship, said Balin, and therewith made him ready to
depart. Then the most part of the knights of the Round Table said that
Balin did not this adventure all only by might, but by witchcraft.


                               CHAP. III.

_How the Lady of the lake demanded the knight’s head that had won the
  sword, or the maiden’s head._

The meanwhile that this knight was making him ready to depart, there
came into the court a lady that hight the Lady of the lake. And she
came on horseback, richly beseen, and saluted king Arthur; and there
asked him a gift that he promised her when she gave him the sword. That
is sooth, said Arthur, a gift I promised you, but I have forgotten the
name of my sword that ye gave me. The name of it, said the lady, is
Excalibur, that is as much to say as Cut-steel. Ye say well, said the
king, ask what ye will and ye shall have it, and it lie in my power to
give it. Well, said the lady, I ask the head of the knight that hath
won the sword, or else the damsel’s head that brought it; I take no
force though I have both their heads, for he slew my brother, a good
knight and a true, and that gentlewoman was causer of my father’s
death. Truly, said king Arthur, I may not grant neither of their heads
with my worship, therefore ask what ye will else, and I shall fulfil
your desire. I will ask none other thing, said the lady. When Balin was
ready to depart he saw the Lady of the lake that by her means had slain
Balin’s mother, and he had sought her three years, and when it was told
him that she asked his head of king Arthur he went to her straight and
said, Evil be you found, ye would have my head and therefore ye shall
lose yours. And with his sword lightly he smote off her head before
king Arthur. Alas! for shame, said Arthur, why have you done so? ye
have shamed me and all my court, for this was a lady that I was
beholden to, and hither she came under my safe conduct; I shall never
forgive you that trespass. Sir, said Balin, me forthinketh of your
displeasure, for this same lady was the untruest lady living, and by
enchantment and sorcery she hath been the destroyer of many good
knights, and she was causer that my mother was burnt through her
falsehood and treachery. What cause so ever ye had, said Arthur, ye
should have forborne her in my presence; therefore, think not the
contrary, ye shall repent it, for such another despite had I never in
my court: therefore withdraw you out of my court in all haste that ye
may. Then Balin took up the head of the lady, and bare it with him to
his hostry, and there he met with his squire, that was sorry he had
displeased king Arthur, and so they rode forth out of the town. Now,
said Balin, we must part; take thou this head and bear it to my
friends, and tell them how I have sped, and tell my friends in
Northumberland that my most foe is dead. Also tell them how I am out of
prison, and also what adventure befel me at the getting of this sword.
Alas, said the squire, ye are greatly to blame for to displease king
Arthur. As for that, said Balin, I will hie me in all the haste that I
may, to meet with king Ryons and destroy him, or else to die therefore;
and if it may hap me to win him, then will king Arthur be my good and
gracious lord. Where shall I meet with you? said the squire. In king
Arthur’s court, said Balin. So his squire and he departed at that time.
Then king Arthur and all the court made great dole, and had shame of
the death of the Lady of the lake. Then the king buried her richly.


                               CHAP. IV.

_How Merlin told the adventure of this damsel._

At that time there was a knight the which was the king’s son of
Ireland, and his name was Lanceor, the which was an orgulous knight,
and counted himself one of the best of the court, and he had great
despite at Balin for the achieving of the sword, that any should be
accounted more hardy, or of more prowess; and he asked king Arthur if
he would give him leave to ride after Balin, and to revenge the despite
that he had done. Do your best, said Arthur, I am right wroth with
Balin, I would he were quit of the despite that he hath done to me and
to my court. Then this Lanceor went to his hostry to make him ready. In
the meanwhile came Merlin unto the court of king Arthur, and there was
told him the adventure of the sword, and the death of the Lady of the
lake. Now shall I say you, said Merlin, this same damsel that here
standeth, that brought the sword unto your court, I shall tell you the
cause of her coming,—she was the falsest damsel that liveth. Say not
so, said they. She hath a brother, a passing good knight of prowess and
a full true man, and this damsel loved another knight that held her to
paramour, and this good knight her brother met with the knight that
held her to paramour, and slew him by force of his hands. When this
false damsel understood this she went to the lady Lile of Avelion, and
besought her of help, to be avenged on her own brother. And so this
lady Lile of Avelion took her this sword, that she brought with her,
and told there should no man pull it out of the sheath but if he be one
of the best knights of this realm, and he should be hardy and full of
prowess, and with that sword he should slay her brother. This was the
cause that the damsel came into this court. I know it as well as ye.
Would she had not come into this court, but she came never in
fellowship of worship to do good, but alway great harm. And that knight
that hath achieved the sword shall be destroyed by that sword, for the
which will be great damage, for there liveth not a knight of more
prowess than he is, and he shall do unto you, my lord Arthur, great
honour and kindness, and it is great pity he shall not endure but a
while, for of his strength and hardiness I know not his match living.


                                CHAP. V.

_How Balin was pursued by Sir Lanceor, knight of Ireland, and how he
  justed and slew him._

So the knight of Ireland armed him at all points, and dressed his
shield on his shoulder, and mounted upon horseback, and took his spear
in his hand, and rode after a great pace as much as his horse might go,
and within a little space on a mountain he had a sight of Balin, and
with a loud voice he cried, Abide knight, for ye shall abide whether ye
will or nill, and the shield that is tofore you shall not help. When
Balin heard the noise he turned his horse fiercely, and said, Fair
knight what will ye with me, will ye just with me? Yea, said the Irish
knight, therefore come I after you. Peradventure, said Balin, it had
been better to have holden you at home, for many a man weneth to put
his enemy to a rebuke, and oft it falleth to himself. Of what court be
ye sent from? said Balin. I am come from the court of king Arthur, said
the knight of Ireland, that come hither for to revenge the despite ye
did this day to king Arthur and to his court. Well, said Balin, I see
well I must have ado with you, that me forthinketh for to grieve king
Arthur, or any of his court; and your quarrel is full simple, said
Balin, unto me, for the lady that is dead did me great damage, and else
would I have been loth as any knight that liveth for to slay a lady.
Make you ready, said the knight Lanceor, and dress you unto me, for
that one shall abide in the field. Then they took their spears, and
came together as much as their horses might drive, and the Irish knight
smote Balin on the shield, that all went shivers of his spear, and
Balin hit him through the shield, and the hauberk perished, and so
pierced through his body and the horse croup, and anon turned his horse
fiercely and drew out his sword, and wist not that he had slain him,
and then he saw him lie as a dead corpse.


                               CHAP. VI.

_How a damsel, which was love to Lanceor, slew herself for love; and
  how Balin met with his brother Balan._

Then he looked by him, and was ware of a damsel that came riding full
fast as the horse might ride, on a fair palfrey. And when she espied
that Lanceor was slain she made sorrow out of measure, and said, O
Balin, two bodies thou hast slain and one heart, and two hearts in one
body, and two souls thou hast lost. And therewith she took the sword
from her love that lay dead, and fell to the ground in a swoon. And
when she arose she made great dole out of measure, the which sorrow
grieved Balin passingly sore, and he went unto her for to have taken
the sword out of her hand, but she held it so fast he might not take it
out of her hand unless he should have hurt her, and suddenly she set
the pommel to the ground, and rove herself through the body. When Balin
espied her deeds, he was passing heavy in his heart, and ashamed that
so fair a damsel had destroyed herself for the love of his death. Alas,
said Balin, me repenteth sore the death of this knight for the love of
this damsel, for there was much true love betwixt them both. And for
sorrow he might no longer hold him, but turned his horse and looked
towards a great forest, and there he was ware, by the arms, of his
brother Balan. And when they were met they put off their helms and
kissed together, and wept for joy and pity. Then Balan said, I little
wend to have met with you at this sudden adventure; I am right glad of
your deliverance out of your dolorous prisonment, for a man told me in
the castle of Four Stones that ye were delivered, and that man had seen
you in the court of king Arthur, and therefore I came hither into this
country, for here I supposed to find you. Anon the knight Balin told
his brother of his adventure of the sword, and of the death of the Lady
of the lake, and how king Arthur was displeased with him: Wherefore he
sent this knight after me that lieth here dead; and the death of this
damsel grieveth me sore. So doth it me, said Balan, but ye must take
the adventure that God will ordain you. Truly, said Balin, I am right
heavy that my lord Arthur is displeased with me, for he is the most
worshipful knight that reigneth now on earth, and his love I will get
or else I will put my life in adventure; for the king Ryons lieth at a
siege at the castle Terrabil, and thither will we draw in all haste, to
prove our worship and prowess upon him. I will well, said Balan, that
we do, and we will help each other as brethren ought to do.


                               CHAP. VII.

_How a dwarf reproved Balin for the death of Lanceor, and how king Mark
  of Cornwall found them, and made a tomb over them._

Now go we hence, said Balin, and well be we met. The meanwhile as they
talked there came a dwarf from the city of Camelot on horseback, as
much as he might, and found the dead bodies, wherefore he made great
dole, and pulled out his hair for sorrow, and said, Which of you
knights have done this deed? Whereby askest thou it, said Balan. For I
would wit it, said the dwarf. It was I, said Balin, that slew this
knight in my defence, for hither came he to chase me, and either I must
slay him or he me; and this damsel slew herself for his love, which
repenteth me, and for her sake I shall owe all women the better love.
Alas, said the dwarf, thou hast done great damage unto thyself, for
this knight that is here dead was one of the most valiantest men that
lived, and trust well, Balin, the kin of this knight will chase you
through the world till they have slain you. As for that, said Balin, I
fear not greatly, but I am right heavy that I have displeased my lord
king Arthur for the death of this knight. So as they talked together
there came a king of Cornwall riding, the which hight king Mark. And
when he saw these two bodies dead, and understood how they were dead by
the two knights above said, then made the king great sorrow for the
true love that was betwixt them, and said, I will not depart till I
have on this earth made a tomb. And there he pight his pavilions, and
sought through all the country to find a tomb, and in a church they
found one was fair and rich, and then the king let put them both in the
earth, and put the tomb upon them, and wrote the names of them both on
the tomb:—How here lieth Lanceor the king’s son of Ireland that at his
own request was slain by the hands of Balin, and how his lady Colombe
slew herself with her love’s sword for dole and sorrow.


                              CHAP. VIII.

_How Merlin prophesied that two the best knights of the world should
  fight there, which were Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram._

The meanwhile as this was adoing, in came Merlin to king Mark, and
seeing all his doing said, Here shall be in this same place the
greatest battle betwixt two knights that was or ever shall be, and the
truest lovers, and yet none of them shall slay other. And there Merlin
wrote their names upon the tomb with letters of gold that should fight
in that place, whose names were Launcelot de Lake, and Tristram. Thou
art a marvellous man, said king Mark unto Merlin, that speakest of such
marvels, thou art a rude man and an unlikely to tell of such deeds;
what is thy name? said king Mark. At this time, said Merlin, I will not
tell, but at that time when Sir Tristram is taken with his sovereign
lady, then ye shall hear and know my name, and at that time ye shall
hear tidings that shall not please you. Then said Merlin to Balin, Thou
hast done thyself great hurt, because thou savedst not this lady that
slew herself, that might have saved her and thou wouldest. By the faith
of my body, said Balin, I might not save her, for she slew herself
suddenly. Me repenteth, said Merlin, because of the death of that lady
thou shalt strike a stroke the most dolorous that ever man struck,
except the stroke of our Lord, for thou shalt hurt the truest knight
and the man of most worship that now liveth, and through that stroke
three kingdoms shall be in great poverty, misery, and wretchedness,
twelve year, and the knight shall not be whole of that wound many
years. Then Merlin took his leave of Balin. And Balin said, If I wist
it were sooth that ye say, I should do such a perilous deed as that I
would slay myself to make thee a liar. Therewith Merlin vanished away
suddenly. And then Balin and his brother took their leave of king Mark.
First, said the king, tell me your name. Sir, said Balan, ye may see he
beareth two swords, thereby ye may call him the knight with the two
swords. And so departed king Mark unto Camelot to king Arthur, and
Balin took the way to king Ryons: and as they rode together they met
with Merlin disguised, but they knew him not. Whither ride you? said
Merlin. We have little to do, said the two knights, to tell thee: But
what is thy name? said Balin. At this time, said Merlin, I will not
tell it thee. It is evil seen, said the two knights, that thou art a
true man that thou wilt not tell thy name. As for that, said Merlin, be
it as it be may, I can tell you wherefore ye ride this way, for to meet
king Ryons, but it will not avail you without ye have my counsel. Ah,
said Balin, ye are Merlin: we will be ruled by your counsel. Come on,
said Merlin, ye shall have great worship, and look that ye do knightly,
for ye shall have great need. As for that, said Balin, dread you not,
we will do what we may.


                               CHAP. IX.

_How Balin and his brother by the counsel of Merlin took king Ryons,
  and brought him to king Arthur._

Then Merlin lodged them in a wood among leaves beside the highway, and
took off the bridles of their horses and put them to grass, and laid
them down to rest them till it was nigh midnight. Then Merlin bad them
rise and make them ready, for the king was nigh them, that was stolen
away from his host with a threescore horses of his best knights, and
twenty of them rode tofore, to warn the lady De Vance that the king was
coming. Which is the king? said Balin. Abide, said Merlin, here in a
straight way ye shall meet with him; and therewith he shewed Balin and
his brother where he rode. Anon Balin and his brother met with the
king, and smote him down, and wounded him fiercely, and laid him to the
ground, and there they slew on the right hand and the left hand, and
slew more than forty of his men; and the remnant fled. Then went they
again to king Ryons, and would have slain him had he not yielded him
unto their grace. Then said he thus: Knights full of prowess, slay me
not, for by my life ye may win, and by my death ye shall win nothing.
Then said these two knights, Ye say sooth and truth; and so laid him on
an horse-litter. With that Merlin was vanished, and came to king
Arthur, aforehand, and told him how his most enemy was taken and
discomfited. By whom? said king Arthur. By two knights, said Merlin,
that would please your lordship, and to-morrow ye shall know what
knights they are. Anon after came the knight with the two swords, and
Balan his brother, and brought with them king Ryons of North Wales, and
there delivered him to the porters, and charged them with him; and so
they two returned again in the dawning of the day. King Arthur came
then to king Ryons and said, Sir king ye are welcome: by what adventure
come ye hither? Sir, said king Ryons, I came hither by an hard
adventure. Who won you? said king Arthur. Sir, said the king, the
knight with the two swords and his brother, which are two marvellous
knights of prowess. I know them not, said Arthur, but much I am
beholden to them. Ah, said Merlin, I shall tell you, it is Balin that
achieved the sword, and his brother Balan, a good knight, there liveth
not a better of prowess, and of worthiness; and it shall be the
greatest dole of him that ever I knew of knight, for he shall not long
endure. Alas, said king Arthur, that is great pity, for I am much
beholden unto him, and I have ill deserved it unto him for his
kindness. Nay, said Merlin, he shall do much more for you, and that
shall ye know in haste. But, Sir, are ye purveyed? said Merlin; for
to-morn the host of Nero, king Ryons’s brother, will set on you or noon
with a great host, and therefore make you ready, for I will depart from
you.


                                CHAP. X.

_How king Arthur had a battle against Nero and king Lot of Orkney, and
  how king Lot was deceived by Merlin, and how twelve kings were slain._

Then king Arthur made ready his host in ten battles, and Nero was ready
in the field afore the castle Terrabil with a great host, for he had
ten battles, with many more people than Arthur had. Then Nero had the
vaward with the most party of his people: and Merlin came to king Lot
of the Isle of Orkney, and held him with a tale of prophecy till Nero
and his people were destroyed. And there Sir Kay the seneschal did
passingly well, that the days of his life the worship went never from
him. And Sir Hervis de Revel did marvellous deeds with king Arthur, and
king Arthur slew that day twenty knights and maimed forty. At that time
came in the knight with the two swords, and his brother Balan, but they
two did so marvellously that the king and all the knights marvelled of
them, and all they that beheld them said they were sent from heaven as
angels, or devils from hell: and king Arthur said himself they were the
best knights that ever he saw, for they gave such strokes that all men
had wonder of them. In the meanwhile came one to king Lot, and told him
while he tarried there Nero was destroyed and slain with all his
people. Alas, said king Lot, I am ashamed, for by my default there is
many a worshipful man slain, for and we had been together there had
been none host under the heaven that had been able for to have matched
with us: this deceiver with his prophecy hath mocked me. All that did
Merlin, for he knew well that if king Lot had been with his body there
at the first battle, king Arthur had been slain and all his people
destroyed. And well Merlin knew that one of the kings should be dead
that day; and loth was Merlin that any of them both should be slain,
but of the twain he had lever king Lot had been slain than king Arthur.

Now what is best to do? said king Lot of Orkney, whether is me better
to treat with king Arthur or to fight, for the greater part of our
people are slain and destroyed. Sir, said a knight, set on Arthur, for
they are weary and for-foughten, and we be fresh. As for me, said king
Lot, I would that every knight would do his part as I would do mine.
And then they advanced banners and smote together, and all to-shivered
their spears; and Arthur’s knights, with the help of the knight with
the two swords and his brother Balan, put king Lot and his host to the
worse. But alway king Lot held him in the foremost front, and did
marvellous deeds of arms, for all his host was borne up by his hands,
for he abode all knights. Alas, he might not endure, the which was
great pity, that so worthy a knight as he was should be overmatched,
that of late time afore had been a knight of king Arthur’s, and wedded
the sister of king Arthur, and for the wrong king Arthur did him
therefore king Lot held against Arthur. So there was a knight that was
called the knight with the strange beast, and at that time his right
name was called Pellinore, the which was a good man of prowess, and he
smote a mighty stroke at king Lot as he fought with all his enemies,
and he failed of his stroke, and he smote the horse’s neck, that he
fell to the ground with king Lot; and therewith anon Sir Pellinore
smote him a great stroke through the helm and head unto the brows. And
then all the host of Orkney fled for the death of king Lot; and there
were slain many mothers’ sons. But king Pellinore bare the blame of the
death of king Lot, wherefore Sir Gawaine revenged the death of his
father the tenth year after he was made knight, and slew king Pellinore
with his own hands. Also there were slain at that battle twelve kings
on the side of king Lot with Nero, and all were buried in the church of
Saint Stephen’s, in Camelot; and the remnant of knights and of other
were buried in a great rock.


                               CHAP. XI.

_Of the interment of twelve kings, and of the prophecy of Merlin, and
  how Balin should give the dolorous stroke._

So at the interment came king Lot’s wife Morgause, with her four sons,
Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Gareth. Also there came thither king
Uriens, Sir Ewaine’s father, and Morgan le Fay his wife, that was king
Arthur’s sister. All these came to the interment. But of all these
twelve kings king Arthur let make the tomb of king Lot passing richly,
and made his tomb by his own; and then king Arthur let make twelve
images of laton and copper, and over-gilt it with gold, in the sign of
twelve kings, and each one of them held a taper of wax that burnt day
and night: and king Arthur was made in sign of a figure standing above
them with a sword drawn in his hand: and all the twelve figures had
countenance like unto men that were overcome. All this made Merlin by
his subtil craft; and there he told the king, When I am dead these
tapers shall burn no longer; and soon after the adventures of the
Sangreal shall come among you and be achieved. Also he told Arthur how
Balin the worshipful knight shall give the dolorous stroke, whereof
shall fall great vengeance. O where is Balin, and Balan, and Pellinore?
said king Arthur. As for Pellinore, said Merlin, he will meet with you
soon: and as for Balin, he will not be long from you: but the other
brother will depart; ye shall see him no more. By my faith, said
Arthur, they are two marvellous knights, and namely Balin passeth of
prowess of any knight that ever I found, for much beholden am I unto
him; would that he would abide with me. Sir, said Merlin, look ye keep
well the scabbard of Excalibur, for ye shall lose no blood while ye
have the scabbard upon you, though ye have as many wounds upon you as
ye may have. So after, for great trust Arthur betook the scabbard to
Morgan le Fay his sister, and she loved another knight better than her
husband king Uriens or king Arthur, and she would have had Arthur her
brother slain, and therefore she let make another scabbard like it by
enchantment, and gave the scabbard of Excalibur to her love. And the
knight’s name was called Accolon, that after had near slain king
Arthur. After this Merlin told unto king Arthur of the prophecy that
there should be a great battle beside Salisbury, and that Mordred his
sister’s son should be against him. Also he told him that Basdemegus
was his cousin, and germain unto king Uriens.


                               CHAP. XII.

_How a sorrowful knight came tofore king Arthur, and how Balin fetched
  him, and how that knight was slain by a knight invisible._

Within a day or two king Arthur was somewhat sick, and he let pitch his
pavilion in a meadow, and there he laid him down on a pallet to sleep,
but he might have no rest. Right so he heard a great noise of an horse,
and therewith the king looked out at the porch of the pavilion, and saw
a knight coming even by him making great dole. Abide, fair sir, said
Arthur, and tell me wherefore thou makest this sorrow? Ye may little
amend me, said the knight, and so passed forth to the castle of Meliot.
Anon after there came Balin, and when he saw king Arthur he alight off
his horse, and came to the king on foot, and saluted him. By my head,
said Arthur, ye be welcome. Sir, right now came riding this way a
knight making great mourn, for what cause I cannot tell, wherefore I
would desire of you of your courtesy and of your gentleness to fetch
again that knight either by force or else by his good-will. I will do
more for your lordship than that, said Balin: and so he rode more than
a pace, and found the knight with a damsel in a forest, and said, Sir
knight, ye must come with me unto king Arthur, for to tell him of your
sorrow. That will I not, said the knight, for it will scathe me
greatly, and do you none avail. Sir, said Balin, I pray you make you
ready, for ye must go with me, or else I must fight with you and bring
you by force, and that were me loth to do. Will ye be my warrant, said
the knight, and I go with you? Yea, said Balin, or else I will die
therefore. And so he made him ready to go with Balin, and left the
damsel still. And as they were even afore king Arthur’s pavilion there
came one invisible, and smote this knight that went with Balin
throughout the body with a spear. Alas, said the knight, I am slain
under your conduct, with a knight called Garlon: therefore take my
horse, that is better than your’s, and ride to the damsel, and follow
the quest that I was in as she will lead you, and revenge my death when
ye may. That shall I do, said Balin, and that I make a vow unto
knighthood. And so he departed from this knight with great sorrow. So
king Arthur let bury this knight richly, and made a mention on his tomb
how there was slain Herlews le Berbeus, and by whom the treachery was
done,—the knight Garlon. But ever the damsel bare the truncheon of the
spear with her that Sir Herlews was slain withal.


                              CHAP. XIII.

_How Balin and the damsel met with a knight which was in likewise
  slain, and how the damsel bled for the custom of a castle._

So Balin and the damsel rode into a forest, and there met with a knight
that had been on hunting, and that knight asked Balin for what cause he
made so great sorrow. Me list not to tell you, said Balin. Now, said
the knight, and I were armed as ye be I would fight with you. That
should little need, said Balin; I am not afeard to tell you; and told
him all the cause, how it was. Ah, said the knight, is this all: here I
ensure you by the faith of my body never to depart from you while my
life lasteth. And so they went to the hostry and armed them, and so
rode forth with Balin. And as they came by an hermitage even by a
churchyard, there came the knight Garlon invisible, and smote this
knight, Perin de Mountbeliard, through the body with a spear. Alas,
said the knight, I am slain by this traitor knight that rideth
invisible. Alas, said Balin, it is not the first despite that he hath
done me. And there the hermit and Balin buried the knight under a rich
stone, and a tomb royal. And on the morn they found letters of gold
written, how Sir Gawaine shall revenge his father’s death, king Lot, on
the king Pellinore. Anon after this Balin and the damsel rode till they
came to a castle, and there Balin alighted, and he and the damsel wend
to go into the castle. And anon as Balin came within the castle gate
the portcullis fell down at his back, and there fell many men about the
damsel, and would have slain her. When Balin saw that, he was sore
grieved, for he might not help the damsel. And then he went up into the
tower, and lept over the walls into the ditch, and hurt him not; and
anon he pulled out his sword, and would have foughten with them. And
they all said nay, they would not fight with him, for they did nothing
but the old custom of the castle, and told him how their lady was sick,
and had lain many years, and she might not be whole, but if she had a
dish of silver full of blood of a maid and a king’s daughter; and
therefore the custom of this castle is that there shall no damsel pass
this way, but that she shall bleed of her blood in a silver dish full.
Well, said Balin, she shall bleed as much as she may bleed, but I will
not lose the life of her while my life lasteth. And so Balin made her
to bleed by her good-will, but her blood helped not the lady. And so he
and she rested there all night, and had there right good cheer, and on
the morn they passed on their ways. And as it telleth after in the
Sangreal, that Sir Percivale’s sister helped that lady with her blood,
whereof she died.


                               CHAP. XIV.

_How Balin met with that knight named Garlon at a feast, and there he
  slew him, to have his blood to heal therewith the son of his host._

Then they rode three or four days and never met with adventure, and by
hap they were lodged with a gentleman that was a rich man and well at
ease. And as they sat at their supper, Balin heard one complain
grievously by him in a chair. What is this noise? said Balin. Forsooth,
said his host, I will tell you. I was but late at a justing, and there
I justed with a knight that is brother unto king Pellam, and twice
smote I him down; and then he promised to quit me on my best friend,
and so he wounded my son, that cannot be whole till I have of that
knight’s blood, and he rideth alway invisible, but I know not his name.
Ah, said Balin, I know that knight, his name is Garlon, he hath slain
two knights of mine in the same manner, therefore I had rather meet
with that knight than all the gold in this realm, for the despite he
hath done me. Well, said his host, I shall tell you, king Pellam of
Listeneise hath made cry in all this country a great feast that shall
be within these twenty days, and no knight may come there but if he
bring his wife with him, or his love; and that knight, your enemy and
mine, ye shall see that day. Then I promise you, said Balin, part of
his blood to heal your son withal. We will be forward to-morrow, said
his host. So on the morn they rode all three toward Pellam, and they
had fifteen days’ journey or they came thither; and that same day began
the great feast. And so they alight and stabled their horses, and went
into the castle; but Balin’s host might not be let in because he had no
lady. Then Balin was well received, and brought unto a chamber and
unarmed him, and they brought him robes to his pleasure, and would have
had Balin leave his sword behind him. Nay, said Balin, that do I not,
for it is the custom of my country a knight alway to keep his weapon
with him, and that custom will I keep, or else I will depart as I came.
Then they gave him leave to wear his sword, and so he went unto the
castle, and was set among knights of worship, and his lady afore him.
Soon Balin asked a knight, Is there not a knight in this court whose
name is Garlon? Yonder he goeth, said a knight, he with the black face;
he is the marvellest knight that is now living, for he destroyeth many
good knights, for he goeth invisible. Ah, well, said Balin, is that he?
Then Balin advised him long:—If I slay him here I shall not escape,
and if I leave him now peradventure I shall never meet with him again
at such a good time, and much harm he will do and he live. Therewith
this Garlon espied that this Balin beheld him, and then he came and
smote Balin on the face with the back of his hand, and said, Knight,
why beholdest thou me so? for shame, therefore, eat thy meat, and do
that thou came for. Thou sayest sooth, said Balin, this is not the
first despite that thou hast done me, and therefore I will do that I
came for; and rose up fiercely, and clave his head to the shoulders.
Give me the truncheon, said Balin to his lady, wherewith he slew your
knight. Anon she gave it him, for alway she bare the truncheon with
her; and therewith Balin smote him through the body, and said openly,
With that truncheon thou hast slain a good knight, and now it sticketh
in thy body. And then Balin called to him his host, saying, Now may ye
fetch blood enough to heal your son withal.


                               CHAP. XV.

_How Balin fought with king Pellam, and how his sword brake, and how he
  gat a spear wherewith he smote the dolorous stroke._

Anon all the knights arose from the table for to set on Balin. And king
Pellam himself arose up fiercely, and said, Knight, hast thou slain my
brother? thou shalt die therefore or thou depart. Well, said Balin, do
it yourself. Yes, said king Pellam, there shall no man have ado with
thee but myself, for the love of my brother. Then king Pellam caught in
his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at Balin, but Balin put the
sword betwixt his head and the stroke, and therewith his sword burst in
sunder. And when Balin was weaponless he ran into a chamber for to seek
some weapon, and so from chamber to chamber, and no weapon he could
find, and alway king Pellam after him. And at the last he entered into
a chamber that was marvellously well dight and richly, and a bed
arrayed with cloth of gold, the richest that might be thought, and one
lying therein, and thereby stood a table of clean gold, with four
pillars of silver that bare up the table, and upon the table stood a
marvellous spear, strangely wrought. And when Balin saw that spear he
gat it in his hand, and turned him to king Pellam, and smote him
passingly sore with that spear, that king Pellam fell down in a swoon,
and therewith the castle roof and walls brake and fell to the earth,
and Balin fell down so that he might not stir foot nor hand. And so the
most part of the castle that was fallen down through that dolorous
stroke lay upon Pellam and Balin three days.


                               CHAP. XVI.

_How Balin was delivered by Merlin, and saved a knight that would have
  slain himself for love._

Then Merlin came thither and took up Balin, and gat him a good horse,
for his was dead, and bade him ride out of that country. I would have
my damsel, said Balin. Lo, said Merlin, where she lieth dead. And king
Pellam lay so many years sore wounded, and might never be whole, till
Galahad, the haut prince, healed him in the quest of the Sangreal; for
in that place was part of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
Joseph of Arimathea brought into this land, and there himself lay in
that rich bed. And that was the same spear that Longius smote our Lord
to the heart; and king Pellam was nigh of Joseph’s kin, and that was
the most worshipful man that lived in those days, and great pity it was
of his hurt, for that stroke turned to great dole, trouble, and grief.

Then departed Balin from Merlin, and said, In this world we meet never
no more. So he rode forth through the fair countries and cities, and
found the people dead, slain on every side. And all that were alive
cried, O Balin, thou hast caused great damage in these countries; for
the dolorous stroke thou gavest unto king Pellam three countries are
destroyed, and doubt not but the vengeance will fall on thee at the
last. When Balin was past those countries he was passing glad. So he
rode eight days or he met with adventure. And at the last he came into
a fair forest in a valley, and was ware of a tower, and there beside he
saw a great horse of war tied to a tree, and there beside sat a fair
knight on the ground and made great mourning; and he was a likely man
and a well made. Balin said, God save you, why be ye so heavy? tell me,
and I will amend it and I may to my power. Sir knight, said he again,
thou doest me great grief, for I was in merry thoughts, and now thou
puttest me to more pain. Balin went a little from him, and looked on
his horse; then heard Balin him say thus: Ah, fair lady, why have ye
broken my promise, for thou promisedst me to meet me here by noon, and
I may curse thee that ever ye gave me this sword, for with this sword I
slay myself,—and pulled it out; and therewith Balin start unto him,
and took him by the hand. Let go my hand, said the knight, or else I
shall slay thee. That shall not need, said Balin, for I shall promise
you my help to get you your lady, and ye will tell me where she is.
What is your name? said the knight. My name is Balin le Savage. Ah,
sir, I know you well enough; ye are the knight with the two swords, and
the man of most prowess of your hands living. What is your name? said
Balin. My name is Garnish of the Mount, a poor man’s son, but by my
prowess and hardiness a duke hath made me knight, and gave me lands;
his name is duke Hermel, and his daughter is she that I love, and she
me as I deemed. How far is she hence? said Balin. But six mile, said
the knight. Now ride we hence, said these two knights. So they rode
more than a pace till they came to a fair castle, well walled and
ditched. I will into the castle, said Balin, and look if she be there.
So he went in, and searched from chamber to chamber, and found her bed,
but she was not there; then Balin looked into a fair little garden, and
under a laurel tree he saw her lie upon a quilt of green samite, and a
knight with her, and under their heads grass and herbs. When Balin saw
her with the foulest knight that ever he saw, and she a fair lady, then
Balin went through all the chambers again, and told the knight how he
found her, as she had slept fast, and so brought him in the place where
she lay fast sleeping.


                              CHAP. XVII.

_How that knight slew his love and a knight with her, and after how he
  slew himself with his own sword, and how Balin rode toward a castle
  where he lost his life._

And when Garnish beheld her so lying, for pure sorrow his mouth and
nose burst out on bleeding, and with his sword he smote off both their
heads, and then he made sorrow out of measure and said, Oh Balin, much
sorrow hast thou brought unto me, for hadst thou not shewn me that
sight I should have passed my sorrow. Forsooth, said Balin, I did it to
this intent that it should better thy courage, and that ye might see
and know her falsehood, and to cause you to leave love of such a lady:
truly I did none other but as I would ye did to me. Alas! said Garnish,
now is my sorrow double that I may not endure: now have I slain that I
most loved in all my life. And therewith suddenly he rove himself on
his own sword unto the hilts. When Balin saw that, he dressed him
thenceward, lest folks would say he had slain them, and so he rode
forth, and within three days he came by a cross, and thereon were
letters of gold written that said, It is not for any knight alone to
ride toward this castle. Then saw he an old hoar gentleman coming
toward him that said, Balin le Savage, thou passest thy bounds to come
this way, therefore turn again and it will avail thee. And he vanished
away anon; and so he heard an horn blow as it had been the death of a
beast. That blast, said Balin, is blown for me, for I am the prize, yet
am I not dead. Anon withal he saw an hundred ladies and many knights,
that welcomed him with fair semblance, and made him passing good cheer
unto his sight, and led him into the castle, and there was dancing and
minstrelsy, and all manner of joy. Then the chief lady of the castle
said, Knight with the two swords, ye must have ado with a knight hereby
that keepeth an island, for there may no man pass this way but he must
just or he pass. That is an unhappy custom, said Balin, that a knight
may not pass this way but if he just. Ye shall not have ado but with
one knight, said the lady. Well, said Balin, since I shall, thereto am
I ready, but travelling men are oft weary, and their horses also; but
though my horse be weary my heart is not weary. I would be fain there
my death should be. Sir, said a knight to Balin, me thinketh your
shield is not good, I will lend you a bigger: therefore I pray you: and
so he took the shield that was unknown and left his own, and so rode
unto the island, and put him and his horse in a great boat, and when he
came on the other side he met with a damsel, and she said, O knight
Balin, why have ye left your own shield? alas! ye have put your self in
great danger, for by your shield ye should have been known: it is great
pity of you as ever was of knight, for of thy prowess and hardiness
thou hast no fellow living. Me repenteth, said Balin, that ever I came
within this country, but I may not turn now again for shame, and what
adventure shall fall to me, be it life or death, I will take the
adventure that shall come to me. And then he looked on his armour, and
understood he was well armed, and therewith blessed him, and mounted
upon his horse.


                              CHAP. XVIII.

_How Balin met with his brother Balan, and how each of them slew other
  unknown, till they were wounded to death._

Then afore him he saw come riding out of a castle a knight, and his
horse trapped all red, and himself in the same colour. When this knight
in the red beheld Balin, him thought it should be his brother Balin
because of his two swords, but because he knew not his shield, he
deemed it was not he. And so they aventred their spears, and came
marvellously fast together, and they smote each other in the shields,
but their spears and their course were so big that it bare down horse
and man, that they lay both in a swoon. But Balin was bruised sore with
the fall of his horse, for he was weary of travel. And Balan was the
first that rose on foot and drew his sword, and went toward Balin, and
he arose and went against him, but Balan smote Balin first, and he put
up his shield, and smote him through the shield and cleft his helm.
Then Balin smote him again with that unhappy sword, and well nigh had
felled his brother Balan, and so they fought there together till their
breaths failed. Then Balin looked up to the castle, and saw the towers
stand full of ladies. So they went to battle again, and wounded each
other dolefully, and then they breathed oft-times, and so went unto
battle, that all the place there as they fought was blood red. And at
that time there was none of them both but they had either smitten other
seven great wounds, so that the least of them might have been the death
of the mightiest giant in this world. Then they went to battle again so
marvellously that doubt it was to hear of that battle for the great
bloodshedding, and their hauberks unnailed, that naked they were on
every side. At the last Balan, the younger brother, withdrew him a
little and laid him down. Then said Balin le Savage, What knight art
thou? for or now I found never no knight that matched me. My name is,
said he, Balan, brother to the good knight Balin. Alas! said Balin,
that ever I should see this day. And therewith he fell backward in a
swoon. Then Balan went on all four feet and hands, and put off the helm
of his brother, and might not know him by the visage it was so full
hewen and bled; but when he awoke he said, O Balan, my brother, thou
hast slain me and I thee, wherefore all the wide world shall speak of
us both. Alas! said Balan, that ever I saw this day, that through
mishap I might not know you, for I espied well your two swords, but
because ye had another shield I deemed you had been another knight.
Alas! said Balin, all that made an unhappy knight in the castle, for he
caused me to leave mine own shield to our both’s destruction, and if I
might live I would destroy that castle for ill customs. That were well
done, said Balan, for I had never grace to depart from them since that
I came hither, for here it happed me to slay a knight that kept this
island, and since might I never depart, and no more should ye brother,
and ye might have slain me as ye have, and escaped yourself with the
life. Right so came the lady of the tower with four knights and six
ladies and six yeomen unto them, and there she heard how they made
their moan either to other, and said, We came both out of one womb, and
so shall we lye both in one pit. So Balan prayed the lady of her
gentleness, for his true service that she would bury them both in that
same place there the battle was done. And she granted them with weeping
it should be done richly in the best manner. Now will ye send for a
priest, that we may receive our sacrament and receive the blessed body
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, said the lady, it shall be done. And so
she sent for a priest and gave them their rites. Now, said Balin, when
we are buried in one tomb, and the mention made over us how two
brethren slew each other, there will never good knight nor good man see
our tomb but they will pray for our souls. And so all the ladies and
gentlewomen wept for pity. Then, anon Balan died, but Balin died not
till the midnight after, and so were they buried both, and the lady let
make a mention of Balan how he was there slain by his brother’s hands,
but she knew not Balin’s name.


                               CHAP. XIX.

_How Merlin buried them both in one tomb, and of Balin’s sword._

In the morn came Merlin and let write Balin’s name upon the tomb, with
letters of gold, That here lieth Balin le Savage, that was the knight
with the two swords, and he that smote the dolorous stroke. Also Merlin
let make there a bed, that there should never man lye therein but he
went out of his wit, yet Launcelot de Lake fordid that bed through his
nobleness. And anon after Balin was dead, Merlin took his sword and
took off the pommel, and set on another pommel. So Merlin bad a knight
that stood afore him to handle that sword, and he assayed, and he might
not handle it. Then Merlin laughed. Why laugh ye? said the knight. This
is the cause, said Merlin: there shall never man handle this sword but
the best knight of the world, and that shall be Sir Launcelot, or else
Galahad his son, and Launcelot with this sword shall slay the man that
in the world he loved best, that shall be Sir Gawaine. All this he let
write in the pommel of the sword. Then Merlin let make a bridge of iron
and of steel into that island, and it was but half a foot broad, and
there shall never man pass that bridge, nor have hardiness to go over,
but if he were a passing good man and a good knight without treachery
or villainy. Also the scabbard of Balin’s sword Merlin left it on this
side the island that Galahad should find it. Also Merlin let make by
his subtilty that Balin’s sword was put in a marble stone standing
upright as great as a millstone, and the stone hoved always above the
water, and did many years, and so by adventure it swam down the stream
to the city of Camelot, that is in English Winchester. And that same
day Galahad the haut prince came with king Arthur, and so Galahad
brought with him the scabbard, and achieved the sword that was there in
the marble stone hoving upon the water. And on Whitsunday he achieved
the sword, as it is rehearsed in the book of the Sangreal. Soon after
this was done Merlin came to king Arthur and told him of the dolorous
stroke that Balin gave to king Pellam, and how Balin and Balan fought
together the most marvellous battle that ever was heard of, and how
they were buried both in one tomb. Alas! said king Arthur, this is the
greatest pity that ever I heard tell of two knights, for in the world I
know not such two knights. Thus endeth the tale of Balin and Balan, two
brethren born in Northumberland, good knights.
